administration. czech foreign minister karel schwarzenberg , representing the european union ( eu ) , warned belarus on february 23 , 2009 , that recognition of the independence of south ossetia and abkhazia would remove belarus from the "european consensus" not to extend diplomatic recognition to the regions , and might make it less eligible to participate in a prospective eu eastern partnership program of expanded economic cooperation . russian military analyst pavel felgenhauer has warned that western moves to improve relations with russia — which were strained after the august 2008 conflict — risk emboldening russia to try again to gain suzereignty over georgia . he argues that russia's repeated claims that georgia is massing troops and equipment near south ossetia ( claims that monitors from the european union find groundless ) may be cover for a new russian attack . the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe ( pace ) approved a resolution on january 28 , 2009 , criticizing russia for failing to abide by the ceasefire agreements . pace reaffirmed its commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of georgia and again called on russia to withdraw its recognition of the independence of south ossetia and abkhazia . we are involved in military reform in georgia . so this is an ongoing relationship and it is a relationship that we are pursuing , both bilaterally and within the framework of our nato allies. congress has long been at the forefront in u.s. support for georgia , including humanitarian , security , and democratization assistance as well as support for conflict resolution . among recent actions , the senate approved s.res . 550 ( biden ) on june 3 , 2008 , calling on russia to disavow the establishment of direct government - to - government ties with abkhazia and south ossetia . congress had begun its august 2008 recess during the height of the russia - georgia conflict , but many members spoke out on the issue . several members also visited georgia after the ceasefire . among the initial statements were: on august 8 , house foreign affairs committee chairman howard berman urged all parties to cease fighting and for russia to withdraw its troops and respect georgia's territorial integrity . on august 8 , the senate foreign relations committee's then - chairman joseph biden called for u.s. officials and the u.n. security council to facilitate negotiations between the conflicting parties and stated that "moscow has a particular obligation to avoid further escalation of the situation. on august 8 , representative ileana ros - lehtinen stated that russia's invasion of georgia caused little surprise , given russia's other increasingly aggressive foreign policy actions , and called for an international peacekeeping force for south ossetia . on august 10 , senate armed services committee chairman carl levin averred that the united states does "not have much impact , i believe , in terms of [administration] declarations anymore," but should work with europe to make clear to russia that its action "is way out of line" and to convince it to halt aggression in georgia .