during the past year , u.n . member states have been formally and informally negotiating the draft outcome document that will be considered at the review conference . on march 17 , 2009 , the office of the high commissioner for human rights published a draft outcome document "rolling text" based on ongoing member state negotiations . the 17-page document eliminates many controversial aspects of previous drafts , including specific mentions of israel , palestine , and "defamation of religion. some expressed concern with drafts proposed by the working group . in may 2008 , for example , the working group circulated a list of issues that might be included in the conference outcome document . the list specifically referred to the "plight of the palestinian people" and stated that the situation in the occupied palestinian territories violates a range of civil and political rights . critics , however , contend that while the march 8 text might be seen as an improvement over previous drafts it does not meet the conditions for u.s. participation . specifically , opponents point to paragraph 1 which reaffirms the durban declaration and program of action ( ddpa ) . the ddpa had expressed concern about the "plight of the palestinian people under foreign occupation" and recognized "the inalienable right of the palestinian people to self - determination and to the establishment of an independent state. critics hold that by reaffirming the ddpa , the review conference draft outcome is singling out israel as a perpetrator of racism . supporters of u.s. participation argue that the shortened march 8 text is an encouraging development and that the united states should participate in the review conference to influence its outcome . a representative from the u.n. office of the high commissioner for human rights reportedly stated , "we believe this shortened text represents a solid and meaningful basis for negotiations by member states toward a positive outcome for the conference. when advocating u.s. participation , a number of supporters emphasize the difference between early wcar drafts in 2001 that equated zionism with racism and the final ddpa that contained , in the view of many , relatively moderate language by comparison . bush administration officials indicated that the united states would not fund the review conference or its preparatory process unless it was proven that the conference would not become a platform for anti - semitic behavior . the final decision regarding u.s. funding of the conference , however , will be made by the obama administration or members of the 111 th congress . if congress does not enact legislation prohibiting u.s. funding for the review conference , the obama administration may decide on its own to withhold the u.s. proportionate share of u.s. contributions prior to the conference . if such a scenario occurred , it would raise the question as to whether the administration would release funding after the conference if the outcome was acceptable to the united states . specifically , some members of the 110 th and 111 th congresses proposed that the united states withhold a proportionate share of its u.n. assessed contributions , approximately 22% , from the u.n. regular budget , which is used to fund the conference .