2695 was introduced . 111-24 did not mandate any change in interchange fees . however , it directed the government accountability office ( gao ) to complete a study of the interchange issues within six months of its enactment . in the 110 th congress , chairman conyers established a congressional task force to look into interchange fees because some merchant and consumer groups had complained that these fees are cutting into merchants' profits and are costing the cardholders and non - cardholders , who ultimately pay the fee in the price of the goods or services . according to chairman conyers , "in 2005 , u.s. families paid an average of more than $300 for hidden interchange fees including households that do not even use credit cards. another source estimated that , "in 2007 , retail merchants in the united states will pay banks issuing visa and mastercard payment cards more than $30 billion in collectively set per transaction interchange fees. at issue are increases in interchange fees set by the credit card associations like visa and mastercard and card - issuing banks or companies like discover card and american express to enable merchants to gain access to the associations' and issuers' electronic payment network . interchange fees have been rising since the 1990s , despite diminishing fraud losses and technological advances in communications that lowered the costs of accessing the electronic payment system . merchants argue that the card associations have not negotiated these fees with them but instead present them as take it or leave it offers . economists who have studied the payment card market attribute the higher interchange fees to the nature and structure of the market , which is not the traditional market but a two - sided market . within this structure , they have identified two conditions that , combined , could lead to high interchange fees . the conditions are where the payment card issuers have market power and merchants have an inelastic demand for accepting payment cards . some commentators note that if it is determined that interchange fees are excessive as a result of issuing banks' marketing power , those circumstances could lead to the government imposing legal or regulatory caps on interchange fees , as was the case in australia and the united kingdom . related questions have been raised concerning the mechanism the government might use to induce merchants to lower their prices and pass the excess revenues back to the cardholders . in these two countries , the pass back of the fees through price reduction has been voluntary , and there is no formal evidence that merchants lowered their prices . this report focuses on the visa and mastercard card associations that account for more than three - fourths of the payment card market , with visa accounting for 44% and mastercard accounting for 31% of the market in the united states in 2008 . the report does not discuss unitary payment card systems , such as american express and discover cards , that issue virtually all their own cards and sign up their own merchants . this report does not analyze the application of antitrust statutes to interchange fees . the report begins with a discussion of the nontraditional structure of the payment card market .