similar to h.r . 694 , funding would be awarded through a peer - review process in the form of grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements . an eligible institution could receive as much as $2.5 million annually . , what is the condition of the existing space ? , how much of the space requires renovation or repair ? , is there enough space to meet the nation's scientific research needs ? 110-315 , the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ) . , how do colleges and universities fund their research projects ? , etc. ) to be eligible as a pbi , the institution must have , among other things , an enrollment of undergraduate students that is at least 40.0% black , and must have a total enrollment of at least 1,000 undergraduates , with half of them being in degree programs . grant proposals for pbis could be in the areas of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics , in addition to teacher preparation , health education , and international issues . title iii , part e of the heoa provided funding for two new minority science and engineering improvement programs . a partnership grant program would be directed at increasing the participation of underrepresented minority youth or low - income youth in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education . activities to be supported include outreach , hands - on , and experiential - based learning projects . partnership grants to be awarded would be for a period of five years in an amount not less than $500,000 . non - federal matching funds would be required . an additional program would be directed at encouraging minorities to pursue careers in science , mathematics , engineering , and technology . the heoa provided authority for loans for repair and renovation of academic research facilities , among other facilities . language in title iii , part b , investing in hbcus and other minority institutions , provided formula grants to eligible institutions . the percentage of funds allocated to each institution would be based on several factors , and no institution could receive less than $250,000 . also under title iii , part b , the heoa provided assistance to historically black graduate institutions to increase the number of blacks in certain professional disciplines . title iii , part d , hbcu capital financing , established a bonding authority to raise capital to be lent to hbcus for repair and renovation of facilities . the total amount that would be available for financing was $1.1 billion . the aggregate authority principal and unpaid accrued interest on these loans would be made for two types of institutions in the amounts of $733.3 million and $366.7 million . on march 30 , 2010 , president obama signed into law the health care and education affordability reconciliation act , 2010 ( p.l . the act includes , among other things , select provisions of the student aid and fiscal responsibility act ( safra ) . safra provisions are contained in title ii , section 2103 , and make changes to and extend mandatory appropriations for several heoa programs for hbcus and other minority serving institutions . it had ranked eleventh in fy2004 .