comparable data are no longer available . in 1921 , congress passed the snyder act in order to authorize all programs the bia was then carrying out . most bia programs at the time , including education , lacked authorizing legislation . the snyder act continues to provide broad and permanent authorization for federal indian programs . in 1934 , to simplify the reimbursement of public schools for educating indian students , congress passed the johnson - o'malley ( jom ) act , authorizing the bia to contract with the states , except oklahoma , and the territories for the education of indians ( and other services to indians ) . in the 1920s and 1930s , the bia began expanding some of its own schools' grade levels to secondary education . under the impetus of the meriam report and new deal leadership , the bia also began to shift its students toward its local day schools instead of its boarding schools , and , to some extent , to move its curriculum from solely euro - american subjects to include indian culture and vocational education . in addition in 1931 , responsibility for alaska native education was transferred to the bia . the first major non - doi federal funding for indian education in the 20 th century began in 1953 , when the federal assistance for local educational agencies affected by federal activities program , now known as impact aid , was amended to cover indian children eligible for bia schools . impact aid pays public school districts to help fund the education of children in "federally impacted areas. further changes to the impact aid law in 1958 and the 1970s increased the funding that was allocated according to the number of children on indian lands . congressional appropriations for impact aid increased as the jom funding decreased . in 1966 congress added further non - doi funding for indian education by amending the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) of 1965 , the major act authorizing federal education aid to public school districts , to add set - asides for bia schools to the program of grants to help educate students from low - income families ; school library resources , textbook , and instructional materials ; and supplementary educational centers and services . a congressional study of indian education in 1969 that was highly critical of federal indian education programs led to further expansion of federal non - doi assistance for indian education , embodied in the indian education act of 1972 , now known as esea title vi . the indian education act established the office of indian education ( oie ) within the department of health , education and welfare and authorized oie to make grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) with indian children . in contrast , state educational agencies ( seas ) may establish standards , processes , and programs for public schools to implement . bie administers tcsa grants , which are limited to schools , but bia administers isdeaa contracts , which may include other funding streams such as funds for roads and economic development .