circuit . that is , the 11 th circuit , or district courts within its jurisdiction ( including alabama , florida and georgia ) , may choose to interpret the issue of required congressional authorization differently than the d.c . circuit did . however , other courts may be bound by the d.c . circuit's decision under a legal principle known as collateral estoppel . the principle of collateral estoppel , also known as issue preclusion , prevents parties from raising issues that have already been resolved in previous legal proceedings in later cases under certain circumstances . in order to raise the issue of collateral estoppel and prevent the consolidated cases from further litigating the issue decided by the d.c . circuit , a party must show that: ( 1 ) the issue at stake is identical to the one involved in the prior proceeding ; ( 2 ) the issue was actually litigated in the prior proceeding ; ( 3 ) the determination of the issue in the prior litigation must have been "a critical and necessary part" of the judgment in the first action ; and ( 4 ) the party against whom collateral estoppel is asserted must have had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the issue in the prior proceeding . if a court determines that these four elements have been met , the ruling from the prior proceeding stands , meaning that the party raising the issue of collateral estoppel wins on that claim . if at least one element is not met , the court hearing the consolidated cases would be free to interpret the issue independent of the d.c . circuit's decision . appendix b. nepa and current acf operations nepa and the exceptional drought operations when a federal agency takes an action that could significantly affect the environment , it is required to conduct a review under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) ( 42 u.s.c . §§ 4321 et seq. ) the corps submitted an environmental assessment ( ea ) of the exceptional drought operations ( edo ) modification to its operations of woodruff dam with a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) . this ea - fonsi means the corps determined that any adverse environmental effects were not so significant that an environmental impact statement ( eis ) was required . under nepa , an agency is required to take a hard look at the environmental consequences of its action . the u.s. supreme court has said nepa "merely prohibits uninformed — rather than unwise — agency action. the original case ( see alabama case in appendix a ) raises a nepa complaint . legal challenges to eas are based on the following: timing , contents , and conclusions . the timing factor is whether the document informed the agency decision , rather than providing an after - the - fact rationalization of the agency action . challenges based on the contents of a document argue that the document does not show the agency took a hard look at the relevant environmental effects . the conclusion that no eis was required can also be a basis for a legal challenge . timing and content nepa requires federal agencies to comply "to the fullest extent possible.