bush . senator john mccain , among others , has called on congress to lift the offshore drilling moratoria as well . further , the administration proposes to begin planning its next five - year leasing program that would , if approved , be implemented as early as 2010 — two years ahead of schedule . the proposed new five - year program would supersede the current five - year leasing program from 2007-2012 . the administration argues that a new five - year lease program beginning in 2010 would allow any newly opened ocs areas ( if the congressional moratoria is lifted this year ) to be offered in a lease sale sooner than if they remained on their current schedule . since the president lifted the executive ban , members of congress have introduced legislation that would lift the congressional prohibition ( in part or completely ) against leasing and development of oil and natural gas in the ocs . the legislation section of this report summarizes several of those bills , including the house leadership proposal ( h.r . many in congress , however , oppose lifting the offshore ban . they argue that there are still several million acres leased onshore and offshore but not yet producing and that production from these lands could increase u.s. oil supply . on september 16 , 2008 , the house passed h.r . 6899 by a vote of 236-189 and defeated an alternative bill , h.r . 6709 , by a vote of 191-226 . how much oil could be brought into production in the short - term ( from non - producing leased lands or those under the moratoria ) and its impact on price is uncertain . an attempt to lift the offshore moratoria with an amendment to the fy2009 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill during the house subcommittee markup was defeated by a vote of 6-9 . meanwhile , on june 26 , 2008 , under suspension of the rules ( which requires a two - thirds majority for passage ) , the house defeated a measure ( h.r . 6251 ) that would have increased rental fees on non - producing oil and gas leases , and denied new federal leases to those not diligently developing the leases they have . oil and gas leasing has been prohibited on much of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) since the 1980s . congress has enacted ocs leasing moratoria for each of fiscal years 1982-2006 in the annual interior and related agencies appropriations bill ( now the interior and environment and related agencies appropriations bill ) , allowing leasing only in the gulf of mexico ( except near florida ) and parts of alaska . president george h.w . bush in 1990 issued a presidential directive ordering the department of the interior ( doi ) not to conduct offshore leasing or preleasing activity in areas covered by the annual legislative moratoria until 2000 . in 1998 , president clinton extended the offshore leasing prohibition until 2012 .