congressional reaction to this outcome was mixed . senator baucus expressed "deep disappointment" that the supplemental deal "fails to address korea's significant barriers to american beef exports. he stated his commitment to "right this wrong" and to work with the administration to ensure that ranchers "are not left behind. two months later , senator baucus said he will not support the korus fta until south korea opens up its beef market . a few other senators , though concerned with the lack of progress on beef , viewed the deal positively and welcomed the prospect for considering the korus fta in 2011 . meat industry groups again expressed support for this trade agreement that they expect over time will significantly increase their exports to south korea , and urged congress to move quickly to ratify it . beef interests , also supportive , called for continued efforts to secure full market access . memories of the size and intensity of the 2008 anti - beef agreement protests in south korea appear to have directly influenced the position taken on the beef issue by korean negotiators . reflecting this political sensitivity , they reportedly rejected any discussion on this matter in the negotiations held in early november leading up to the summit between presidents obama and lee and in the final talks leading to the supplemental agreement . their position was that this issue "did not fall under" the fta concluded in 2007 . since then , south korea's trade minister has confirmed that there will be no more discussions on ending the age limits of u.s. cattle slaughtered for beef . this stance was affirmed by south korea's ambassador to washington in late january 2011 . seeking to move closer toward submitting the korus fta to congress for consideration , the administration on may 4 , 2011 , announced two measures it will take on the u.s. beef access issue . in a letter to senator baucus , ustr's ron kirk committed to request consultations with south korea on the "full implementation" of the protocol ( eg , opening korea's market "to all ages and all cuts of u.s. beef" ) as soon as this trade agreement takes effect . the letter referenced one specific provision stipulating that bilateral consultations on the interpretation or application of the protocol's terms "shall be held within seven days" of a request . usda also announced a $1 million award to the u.s. meat export federation ( usmef ) to be used in 2011 to promote u.s. beef sales in south korea , and its intent to consider future funding requests from the usmef to implement its planned five - year market beef promotion strategy in this key market . senator baucus welcomed both steps , stating that he will support the korus fta and will work with the administration on a package of trade measures that includes all three ftas and renewing trade adjustment assistance and trade preference programs . the korean national assembly completed an inconclusive parliamentary inquiry on the strategy and process followed by two successive governments on negotiating this agreement . it also debated a controversial livestock sector bill that includes a ban on beef imports from any country whenever a new case of a bse - infected cattle is discovered .