in addition to the h.r . 6899 , the republican leadership in the house has introduced its own energy tax bill , h.r . 6566 , which also extends and expands some of the energy tax incentives and contains no tax increases ( offsets ) . the energy tax provisions in this bill are , however , smaller and somewhat narrower than those in h.r . in the senate , legislative efforts on energy tax incentives and energy tax extenders center around s. 3478 , the energy independence and investment act of 2008 , a $40 billion energy tax bill offered by finance committee chairman max baucus and ranking republican charles grassley . senate majority leader harry reid said on september 12 that s. 3478 is "must - pass" legislation . reid told reporters the energy tax package , which includes extensions of tax incentives for renewable energy , should be prioritized even ahead of the broader energy policy bills being considered , and the rest of the non - energy tax extenders package . reid said he hopes to bring the bill to the floor during the week of september 15 , but noted that the schedule depends on whether senate republicans will agree to move to the legislation . while most of the tax incentives in the bill are extensions of existing policy and are not controversial , the legislation would need to be paid for through new sources of revenue . one proposed offset — which has been previously blocked by republicans — would repeal the irc §199 manufacturing deduction for the five major oil and gas producers , raising $13.9 billion over 10 years . the bill also would be paid for through a new 13% excise tax on oil and natural gas pumped from the outer continental shelf , a proposal to eliminate the distinction between foreign oil and gas extraction income and foreign oil - related income , and an extension and increase in the oil spill tax through the end of 2017 . in total , tax increases on the oil and gas industry would account for $31 billion of the $40 billion total cost of the legislation . the final major offset would come from a requirement on securities brokers to report on the cost basis for transactions they handle to the internal revenue service , a provision expected to raise about $8 billion in new revenues over 10 years . the tax offsets , or tax increases in s. 3478 are not without controversy , however , particularly the repeal of the irc §199 manufacturing deduction for the five major oil and gas producers , as discussed previously . several times the house has approved energy tax legislation , and several times in the senate such legislation failed a cloture vote and thus could not be brought to the floor for debate . as noted above , republicans have in the past objected to the idea of raising taxes to offset extension of expiring energy tax provisions , which they consider to be an extension of current tax policy rather than new tax policy . in addition , some senate republicans have objected to raising taxes on the oil and gas industry , particularly by repealing the irc §199 deduction .