each is discussed in more depth below . when the manhattan project and the apollo program are used as analogies for future doe energy technology r&d , the following points may be important to consider: to be equivalent in annual average funding , doe energy technology r&d funding would need to increase from approximately $3 billion in fy2008 to at least $4 billion per program year to match the manhattan project funding , or $7 billion per program year to match apollo program funding levels or doe energy technology r&d funding at its peak . to be equivalent of peak year funding would require even greater increases . in terms of federal outlays , energy technology r&d funding would need to increase from 0.5% to 1% ( manhattan project ) or 2.2 % ( apollo program ) of federal outlays . as a percentage of gdp , this funding would need to increase from 0.1% to 0.4% of gdp ( for both the manhattan project and the apollo program ) . both the manhattan project and the apollo program had a singular and specific goal . for the manhattan project , the response to the threat of enemy development of a nuclear bomb was the goal to construct a bomb ; for the apollo program , the threat of soviet space dominance was translated into a specific goal of landing on the moon . for energy , however , the response to the problems of insecure oil sources and high prices has resulted in multiple , sometimes conflicting goals . both the manhattan project and the apollo program goals pointed to technologies primarily for governmental use with little concern about their environmental impact ; for energy , in contrast , the hoped for outcome depends on commercial viability and mitigation of the environmental impacts of the energy technologies developed . although the manhattan project and the apollo program may provide some useful analogies for funding , these differences may limit their utility regarding energy policy . rather , energy technology r&d has been driven by at least three not always commensurate goals — resource and technological diversity , commercial viability , and environmental protection — which were not goals of the historical programs . the new manhattan project for energy independence ( h.r .