this section discusses both . the amount of money in the pecf depends on taxpayer designations and candidate use . as table 4 and figure 3 show , and as would be expected , the balance in the fund typically builds during off years and then drops sharply during presidential election years . for the past several years , as taxpayer designations have declined and campaigns have become more expensive , there has been widespread concern that the amount of money available in the fund — and spending limits for participants — were too low to make the program attractive to candidates . in an effort to avoid a projected shortfall in the pecf , in 1993 congress increased the checkoff amount from $1 ( or $2 for married couples filing jointly ) to $3 ( or $6 ) . that change took effect for 1993 tax returns . increasing the checkoff amount did infuse additional money into the pecf , but the fund has nonetheless struggled with shortfalls for primary matching funds . additional discussion appears below . although fund balances were sufficient to pay the convention grants and general - election grants , shortfalls in primary matching funds occurred in 1996 and 2000 . a shortfall also occurred briefly in 2004 , but major shortfalls were avoided , as eventual nominees george w. bush and john kerry , among others , declined to participate in public financing during the primary . shortfalls also occurred in the spring of 2008 . the larger issue during 2008 , however , was the fec's inability to certify matching - fund payments after the agency lost its policymaking quorum . eligible candidates received matching funds after the quorum was restored . in the absence of broad candidate participation in 2012 , shortfalls did not occur . various policy options exist for updating the public financing system . some of those options are contained in recent legislation . others discussed below present alternatives for addressing concerns surrounding presidential public financing , but are not components of recent legislation . the following sections discuss possibilities for increasing the amount of money available in the pecf and options for increasing the program's attractiveness to candidates . taxpayer participation is also discussed . none of the policy options discussed in this report and elsewhere is likely to be considered in isolation , as the public financing program has always contained a combination of benefits and requirements . for those who are either philosophically opposed to public financing or who view the system as unnecessary , curtailing or repealing public financing could be desirable . whether congress chose to pursue those approaches or others , repealing or curtailing public financing could be a straightforward matter of time - limiting or striking the relevant sections of law , as opposed to considering various options and amending relevant law to change the program . the preceding section on reconsidering funding priorities explains that repealing convention funding could preserve remaining amounts for primary matching funds and general - election grants . this option could also provide a financial boost to the pecf overall without allocating additional funds to the program . in 2012 , convention grants accounted for approximately $36.5 million of the pecf's obligations .