on the other hand , some of the reports are not required for years . for example , section 134 of the act requires omb to "submit a report to the congress on the net amount within the troubled asset relief program under this act" five years after the date that eesa was enacted ( i.e. no single entity receives all of the eesa - required reports . also , it is not readily apparent why some of the reports are filed with the set of "appropriate committees," some to a subset of those committees , and some to congress as a whole . section 105 ( b ) requires the secretary to report to the same committees on the same transactions within seven days of each $50 billion in commitments to purchase troubled assets . as the cop's january 9 , 2009 , report stated: eesa does not require recipients of tarp funds to make reports on the use of funds . however , it is within treasury's authority to make such reports a condition of receiving funding , to establish benchmarks for tarp recipient conduct , or to have formal procedures for voluntary reporting by tarp recipient institutions or formal guidelines on the use of funds . section 116 requires the comptroller general to oversee the activities of the tarp and report on his findings at least every 60 days , which would presumably include tarp - related agreements , transactions , and insurance contracts . section 121 requires the special inspector general to report every quarter on its audits of ( among other things ) all "troubled assets" purchased or sold under section 101 , and the management of any insurance program under section 102 . also , section 105 ( c ) of the act requires the secretary of the treasury to review the current state of the financial markets and the regulatory system and submit a written report to the appropriate committees of congress not later than april 30 , 2009 . that report is also required to provide recommendations regarding whether any participants in the financial markets that are currently outside the regulatory system should become subject to the regulatory system . similarly , section 125 ( b ) ( 2 ) requires the cop to submit a "special report on regulatory reform" by january 20 , 2009 , "analyzing the current state of the regulatory system and its effectiveness at overseeing the participants in the financial system and protecting consumers. the report is also required to provide "recommendations for improvement , including recommendations regarding whether any participants in the financial markets that are currently outside the regulatory system should become subject to the regulatory system. the number and variety of the required reports may have been intended to provide a variety of perspectives on the implementation of eesa , but the lack of integration of those requirements may make understanding the implementation of the act difficult . also , given the nature of the "troubled assets" being purchased under the tarp ( i.e. , bank stock instead of mortgages or other instruments related to mortgages ) , it is unclear whether some of the reporting requirements are still relevant to the activities being carried out .