this is an absolute prohibition . a house of worship with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status that engages in any amount of campaign activity may have its 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status revoked by the irs . it may also , either in addition to or in lieu of revocation , be taxed on its political expenditures . in 2002 , the irs indicated that only two churches have lost their 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status due to campaign intervention . one of these is the church at pierce creek in binghamton , new york , which took out newspaper advertisements opposing a presidential candidate four days before the 1992 election . the identity of the second is not clear . several non - church religious organizations have also had their 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status revoked , including christian echoes national ministry . it has been reported that the way international , christian broadcasting network , and old time gospel hour came to settlement agreements with the irs which included revocations for certain years . the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , which regulates the raising and spending of campaign funds , is separate and distinct from the tax code . feca prohibits corporations — including incorporated 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) religious entities — from using general treasury funds to make contributions in connection with federal elections . while feca does not prohibit unincorporated 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations from making such contributions , the irc prohibits all 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations , regardless of corporate status , from making such contributions , as discussed above . in its ruling in citizens united v. fec , the supreme court invalidated the prohibitions in feca on corporations and labor unions using their general treasury funds to make "independent expenditures," which are communications "expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate" that are not coordinated with any candidate or party , and "electioneering communications," which are broadcast , cable , or satellite transmissions that refer to a clearly identified federal candidate and aired within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary . the court determined that these prohibitions constitute a "ban on speech" in violation of the first amendment . due to the tax code prohibition discussed above , houses of worship with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status are generally not permitted to engage in the activities regulated by feca , and thus the citizens united decision does not appear to impact them in a significant manner . it should be noted that the activities that constitute electioneering under the irc and feca are not necessarily identical . this means that even if the bill were enacted into law , campaign activity ( and any other non - exempt purpose activity ) could not be the houses of worship's primary activity , and an entity that significantly benefited partisan interests could still jeopardize its tax - exempt status . the bill would not change the current irc reporting requirements .