in 1978 , the house agreed to h.res . 86 , which further amended house rules to permit unlimited numbers of cosponsors . "dear colleague" letters sent through internal mail must be written on official letterhead , address official business , and be signed by a member or officer of congress . member - to - member correspondence has long been used in congress . for example , since early house rules required measures to be introduced only in a manner involving the "explicit approval of the full chamber," representatives needed permission from other members to introduce legislation . a common communication medium for soliciting support for this action was a letter to colleagues . for example , representative abraham lincoln , in 1849 , formally notified his colleagues in writing that he intended to seek their authorization to introduce a bill to abolish slavery in the district of columbia . the use of the phrase "dear colleague" has been used to refer to a widely distributed letter among members at least since early in the 20 th century . the current number of paper copies needed for distribution of a "dear colleague" letter in the house is 475 for all members only ( including leadership ) ; 525 for all members ( including leadership and full committees ) ; 625 for members , full committees , and subcommittees ; 300 for republican members , leadership , and full republican committees ; 275 for all republican members and leadership only ; 250 for democratic members , leadership , and full democratic committees ; 200 for all democratic members and leadership only ; and 700 for all house mail stops . for distribution to the senate , house "dear colleague" letters must have a separate cover letter addressed to the deputy chief administrative officer of the house for customer solutions , adhere to the same standards as house "dear colleague" letters , and follow the current distribution numbers of 110 for senators only , and 135 for senators and committees . when using the paper system , congressional offices create and photocopy their "dear colleague" letters and deliver them to either the first call customer service center or to the house postal operations office . when the house postal operations office is closed , letters may be deposited in a drop box located in the vending area of the longworth cafeteria . a copy of the "dear colleague" letter is delivered to offices as requested . on august 12 , 2008 , the house introduced a web - based e - "dear colleague" distribution system . the e - "dear colleague" system replaced the email - based system . under the e - "dear colleague" system , then - chair of the committee on house administration , representative robert brady , wrote that members and staff "will be able to compose e - dear colleagues online , and associate them with up to three issue areas . members and staff will be able to independently manage their subscription to various issue areas and receive e - dear colleagues according to individual interest. pursuant to the house members' congressional handbook , the rules regulating a paper "dear colleague" letter sent via internal mail are also applicable to a letter sent electronically .