create a u.s . global health corporation to build a more unified approach to development and health . create a smart power deputy under the national security advisor and the director of the office of management and budget . improve inter - agency coordination by strengthening department executive secretaries with an adjunct standing coordination center . establish a quadrennial smart power review . consistent with both the help and sfrc reports , the csis report recommends increased funding for foreign assistance programs . elevate the development mission within the u.s. government by increasing the size of the development and humanitarian budget and increasing aid effectiveness . other organizations and think tanks have studies in various stages of development . many hope to be able to offer viable options to a new administration and congress . most of these organizations support both increased resources and an elevated visibility for assistance programs . disagreement remains on whether a new structure and authorizing legislation is needed , and what any new structure would look like . there are a variety of organizational reforms that can be undertaken . those chosen would depend on what congress perceives to be the major problems besetting u.s. foreign assistance policy , whether those problems are related to goals and strategy ; implementation and effectiveness ; or coordination and coherence . the following section outlines the criticisms of current aid programs and issues that congress faces in reforming them . the next section provides a review of proposals for policy options and organizational reform in how foreign aid policy is formulated and how aid programs are administered and managed . the topic of foreign aid reform and reorganization has existed nearly as long as foreign aid programs themselves . in fact , the creation of usaid in the kennedy administration was partly an effort to bring coordination to aid programs that had developed across government agencies . since then , there have been numerous studies of how best to organize foreign aid in order to increase its effectiveness and to support u.s. interests . there are at least three paths congress can consider with regard to policy options . one is to maintain the status quo , with all the attributes described herein . a second is to maintain the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , but further amend it to reflect the challenges of the 21 st century , and possibly to support a different mix of assistance by refocusing goals , strategies , and programs . as outlined below , those include refocus assistance ; change or better define the role of the department of defense ; change the use of multilateral instruments and organizations ; and create a unified budget . another path , and arguably a more ambitious one , is to reorganize the current aid infrastructure to achieve congressional objectives . this could entail a re - write of the foreign assistance act of 1961 . as outlined below , structural reform options include elevate usaid to a cabinet - level department ; merge usaid into the state department ; create a new aid agency with increased jurisdiction ; and improve interagency coordination .