services were sometimes held in the house or senate chamber . on february 27 , 1838 , for example , funeral services for representative jonathan cilley of maine were held in the hall of the house , with the house and senate in attendance . since the earliest days of the republic , some of the expenses of holding funerals of sitting members , or the procurement of cemetery monuments , have been defrayed in part from public funds . from 1789-1801 , it appears that the travel allowances of deceased members of the house were applied to funeral costs . when delegate narsworthy hunter of mississippi territory died on march 11 , 1802 , a week after the seventh congress ( 1801-1803 ) convened , the practice of providing a funeral at public expense was first adopted by the house . on june 5 , 1809 , the senate adopted a resolution "that a sum not exceeding one hundred and fifty dollars be applied out of the contingent fund for placing a neat slab or monument with a suitable inscription" over the tomb of senator francis malbone of rhode island , who died on march 4 . on june 15 , 1809 , the senate authorized the secretary of the senate to pay the expenses of senator malbone's funeral , upon allowance and certification "by the committee of arrangement. paying for member funerals with public funds has not been without controversy . in an 1820 remembrance of delegate hunter's funeral , representative john randolph of virginia noted that since 1802 , the practice of funding member funerals had been "observed and abused. in 1848 , the subject came up twice within a few weeks . contrary to precedent , the tenor of those discussions was that it was unusual to pay the expenses of a member's funeral except when it was held in washington , dc , and that the cost of such ceremonies amounted to an average of $1,500 . in 1895 , the senate considered s. 236 , to provide for disposition of the remains of deceased members of the house and senate who died at the capitol during sessions . further , if a deceased member is buried in the so - called congressional cemetery in washington , dc , the sergeant at arms of the house or senate , as appropriate , is authorized to pay for a granite monument with suitable inscriptions for the grave site . it appears likely that any future senate observances could be based on the following: past senate practices ; the wishes a senator expressed prior to his or her demise ; family considerations ; the intended locations of any observances ; pending congressional business at the time of the member's death ; and events external to congress . where procedures for observances in the capitol rotunda appear to be well established , the senate floor has not been used for observances related to the death of a sitting senator in more than 50 years . questions related to security , crowd control , and the preservation of furniture , artwork , and other fixtures may arise if proposed observances include exercises in the senate chamber .