105-115 ) , reauthorized in p.l . 107-109 , and the pediatric research equity act ( prea ; p.l . 107-188 ) and the medical device user fee and modernization act ( mdufma ; p.l . fda had reportedly urged congress to complete its reauthorization efforts before august 1 , 2007 ( rather than by the program's termination date of october 1 , 2007 ) , because of a requirement that fda notify employees at least 60 days in advance of layoffs , which would be necessary without pdufa and mdufma funds . unless otherwise noted , mention of "the secretary" in the following tables refers to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) . for background information on the impetus for this legislation and for an overview of the two bills , see crs report rl34089 , fda legislation in the 110 th congress: a guide to s. 1082 and h.r . 2900 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . 2900 represent the most comprehensive fda legislation since the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( fdama ; p.l . the primary driver of the legislation is the renewal of fda's authority for two key user fee programs set to expire at the end of fy2007: the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ; p.l . the media report that fda has switched to reserve funds to forestall the issuance of layoff notifications , the effect of which is a hiring freeze at fda . in addition , the fda commissioner has reportedly stressed that the funding uncertainty is harming the morale of employees — 30% of which are at a point where they can retire . the bills also would reauthorize two other expiring authorities , which are related to pediatric pharmaceuticals: the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca ; p.l . in addition , the bills address a number of other issues of concern to congress and the public . this report presents a side - by - side analysis of s. 1082 and h.r . in general , provisions in the two bills amend fda's authorities in the federal food , drug and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) or the public health service act ( phsa ) . 2900 , highlighting the differences between the bills . it contains individual tables on topics covered by the bills , including prescription drug user fees , medical device user fees , medical device regulation , pediatric exclusivity incentives ( bpca ) , mandatory pediatric assessments ( prea ) , pediatric medical devices , drug safety , antibiotic drugs , clinical trials databases , conflicts of interest , importation of prescription drugs , a new reagan - udall foundation , food safety , domestic pet turtle market access , and other provisions . both chambers of congress have passed comprehensive legislation to reauthorize expiring programs at the food and drug administration ( fda ) and to expand the agency's authority to help ensure the safety of certain medical products . the bills are the food and drug administration revitalization act ( s. 1082 ) and the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( h.r .