appendix a . nominations and recess appointments , 109 th congress appendix b . actions other than confirmation ( i.e. , nominations returned to or withdrawn by the president ) are also noted . some individuals were nominated more than once for the same position , either because the first nomination was returned to the president or because of a recess appointment . when a nominee is awaiting senate action and he or she is given a recess appointment , a second , follow - up , nomination is usually submitted to comply with the requirements of 5 u.s.c . ยง 5503 ( b ) , as discussed above , under "recess appointments. each appointment action table provides the average "days to confirm" in two ways: mean and median . the mean is determined by calculating , for each confirmed nomination , the number of days between the nomination and confirmation dates , determining the cumulative total of these days , and dividing the result by the number of nominations confirmed . the median is the middle number when the "days to confirm" data for all the confirmed nominations are arranged in numerical order . additional appointment information appendix a presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in executive departments , alphabetically organized , by last name , and following a similar format to that of the department appointment action tables . it identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination and confirmation . the president may sign the commission at any time after confirmation or not at all . once the appointee is given the commission and sworn in , he or she has full authority to carry out the responsibilities of the office . recess appointments the constitution also empowers the president to make limited - term appointments without senate confirmation when the senate is in recess . such recess appointments expire at the end of the next session of the senate . appendix c provides a table showing the dates of the senate recesses for the 109 th congress and the number of recess appointments to full - time departmental positions during each recess . presidents have occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process . in response , congress has enacted provisions that restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances . because most potential appointees to full - time positions cannot serve without a salary , the president has an incentive to use his recess appointment authority in ways that allow them to be paid . under the provisions , if the position falls vacant while the senate is in session and the president fills it by recess appointment , the appointee may not be paid from the treasury until he or she is confirmed by the senate . candidates for higher - level positions have often been accorded priority in this process .