110-116 , in november . the army and marine corps used money in the regular bill to finance both day - to - day peacetime activities and also war - related operations . the high pace of operations in iraq , however , meant that amounts in the base budget for army and marine corps operation and maintenance , in particular , were being drained very quickly . some budget experts and others have criticized the administration for relying too heavily on supplementals , and that some items , particularly relating to iraq and afghanistan , have become routine and should be incorporated into the regular appropriations cycle . the administration counters that given the nature of rapidly changing overseas events and unforeseen emergencies , it is necessary to make emergency supplemental requests for what it claims are unexpected and non - recurring expenses . in addition , narcotics trafficking is resisting counter - measures , and independent militias remain throughout the country , although many have been disarmed . the afghan government and u.s. officials have said that some taliban commanders are operating across the border from pakistan , putting them outside the reach of u.s. / nato forces in afghanistan . in 2007 , the administration unveiled the reconstruction opportunity zones ( roz ) in afghanistan and the border regions with pakistan , an initiative to stimulate economic activity in underdeveloped , isolated regions . the united states and partner stabilization measures focus on strengthening the central government and its security forces and on promoting reconstruction while combating the renewed insurgent challenge . as part of this effort , the international community has been running prts to secure reconstruction . despite these efforts , weak provincial governance is seen as a key obstacle to a democratic afghanistan and continues to pose a threat to reconstruction and stabilization efforts . the administration requested $339 million in esf for afghanistan reconstruction assistance in the fy2008 emergency supplemental in february 2007 . other parts of the supplement request for afghanistan included increases in embassy operations and security . the administration amended the fy2008 supplemental request in october 2007 for a total request of $839 million for reconstruction , which included several provisions intended to continue u.s. efforts to stabilize afghanistan and continue economic reconstruction efforts . the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act funded most government operations for which regular fy2008 appropriations bills — 11 in all — had not been enacted . although emergency funds for military operations in afghanistan were appropriated as part of the bridge supplemental in the consolidated appropriations act ( $1.753 million ) , the supplemental request of $839 for reconstruction was not appropriated . key elements of the fy2008 emergency supplemental requests include funding for the esf . in addition to the $339 million for esf in the initial supplemental request , the amended supplemental included additional funding for democratic governance and reconstruction efforts to continue security and development strategy , which would be allocated as follows: $275 million to strengthen provincial governance and responsiveness to the afghan people .