discussion: this language in h.r . title 37 u.s.c . 1009 provides a permanent formula for annual military pay raises that indexes the raise to the annual increase in the employment cost index ( eci ) . the fy2009 president's budget request for a 3.4 percent military pay raise was consistent with this formula . congress , in fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 , and fy2008 approved the raise as the eci increase plus 0.5 percent . the fy2007 pay raise was equal to the eci . discussion: a military pay raise larger than the permanent formula is not uncommon . mid - year , targeted pay raises ( targeted at specific grades and longevity ) have also been authorized over the past several years . this year's proposed legislation includes no mention of targeted pay raises . reference ( s ) : crs report rl33446 , military pay and benefits: key questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact ( poc ) : charles henning at x[phone number scrubbed] . background: chapter 15 of title 10 , sometimes referred to as the insurrection act , provides the president with the authority to call the militia into federal service and to use "the armed forces" to respond to certain domestic disorders , including aiding state governments in suppressing insurrection ( 10 usc 331 ) , enforcing the laws of the united states and suppressing rebellion ( 10 usc 332 ) , and preventing domestic violence which interferes with the execution of federal and state laws ( 10 usc 333 ) . discussion: the amendments contained in section 591 of the h.r . 5658 would specify that the president's authority to use the armed forces to respond to these domestic disorders includes the ability to activate members of the federal reserve components ( army reserve , navy reserve , air force reserve , marine corps reserve , and coast guard reserve ) and use them as part of the response effort . activation of the army national guard and air national guard is already provided for under the original language authorizing the president to order the militia into federal service ( the militia includes , but is not limited to , the national guard ) . reference ( s ) : crs report rl30802 , reserve component personnel issues: questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact ( poc ) : [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: section 12304 of title 10 allows the president to activate certain reservists for a period of up to 365 days for specified purposes . this authority is commonly referred to as presidential reserve call - up ( prc ) authority . a subparagraph of section 12304 prohibits the president from using this authority for "providing assistance to either the federal government or a state in time of a serious natural or manmade disaster , accident , or catastrophe," unless responding to an certain emergencies involving weapons of mass destruction or terrorist attacks . discussion: section 594 of h.r .