480 food assistance . a total of $200 million in emergency mra was provided ; the request was $230 million , which included $35 million for the west bank and gaza . the administration proposed $106 million in esf funds for north korea as a result of commitments made as part of the six party talks . nearly half of the total foreign operations package was allocated for assistance in iraq and afghanistan . the bush administration has increasingly requested emergency supplemental funds for international affairs budgets . slow reconstruction , corruption , and the failure to extend afghan government authority into rural areas and provinces , particularly in the south and east , have contributed to the taliban resurgence . political leadership in the more stable northern part of the country have registered concerns about distribution of reconstruction funding . in addition , narcotics trafficking is resisting counter - measures , and independent militias remain throughout the country , although many have been disarmed . the afghan government and u.s. officials have said that some taliban commanders are operating across the border from pakistan , putting them outside the reach of u.s. / nato forces in afghanistan . in 2007 , the administration unveiled the reconstruction opportunity zones ( roz ) in afghanistan and the border regions with pakistan , an initiative to stimulate economic activity in underdeveloped , isolated regions . the united states and partner stabilization measures focus on strengthening the central government and its security forces and on promoting reconstruction while combating the renewed insurgent challenge . as part of this effort , the international community has been running prts to secure reconstruction . despite these efforts , weak provincial governance is seen as a key obstacle to a democratic afghanistan and continues to pose a threat to reconstruction and stabilization efforts . the administration requested $339 million in esf for afghanistan reconstruction assistance in the fy2008 emergency supplemental in february 2007 . other parts of the supplement request for afghanistan included increases in embassy operations and security . the administration amended the fy2008 supplemental request in october 2007 for a total request of $839 million for reconstruction , which included several provisions intended to continue u.s. efforts to stabilize afghanistan and continue economic reconstruction efforts . the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act funded most government operations for which regular fy2008 appropriations bills — 11 in all — had not been enacted . although emergency funds for military operations in afghanistan were appropriated as part of the bridge supplemental in the consolidated appropriations act ( $1.753 million ) , the supplemental request of $839 for reconstruction was not appropriated . key elements of the fy2008 emergency supplemental requests include funding for the esf . in addition to the $339 million for esf in the initial supplemental request , the amended supplemental included additional funding for democratic governance and reconstruction efforts to continue security and development strategy that would be allocated as follows: $275 million to strengthen provincial governance and responsiveness to the afghan people .