that is discussed in the appendix . ofheo was the office within hud that was responsible for regulating the safety and soundness of fannie mae's and freddie mac's operations . the appropriations for ofheo were completely offset by fees collected from fannie mae and freddie mac . for fy2009 , the budget and the senate committee recommended an appropriation of over $66 million , an increase of $600,000 over the fy2008 appropriation . the omnibus does not provide any funding for ofheo . the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 , p.l . projects generally must comply with the requirements of the lihtc program rather than the requirements of the home program . homelessness prevention fund as part of arra , congress appropriated $1.5 billion to be used for activities to prevent homelessness and for rapid re - housing to assist those who may become homeless . the funds are to be distributed to local communities ( metropolitan cities and urban counties ) and states for use in communities that do not receive their own funds through the emergency shelter grants ( esg ) program , which uses the cdbg formula to determine allotments . on february 25 , 2009 , hud announced how the funds would be distributed . although funds will be distributed via the esg formula , unlike the esg program , where only 30% of funds may be used for homelessness prevention activities , all funds are to be used for activities to prevent homelessness or to quickly find housing for those who become homeless . specifically , the law provides that funds may be used for short - or medium - term rental assistance , and for activities to help families find and maintain housing such as help with housing searches , outreach to landlords , credit repair , security or utility deposits , utility payments , first month's rent , and help with moving expenses . grantees must expend at least 60% of funds within two years of the date that the funds are made available by hud , and 100% of funds within three years . assisted housing stability and energy and green retrofit investments arra provided $2.25 billion for "assisted housing stability and energy and green retrofit investments. of that amount , $2 billion is to be used for section 8 project - based rental assistance contract renewals . as discussed earlier in this report , in the section entitled " contract renewal funding " , the amount of funding provided should be sufficient to allow hud to resume full - year contract renewals with private property owners . the remaining $250 million is to be used for energy and green retrofit investments in assisted housing properties . assisted housing properties include properties with section 8 project - based rental assistance contracts , and properties with project - based rental assistance contracts provided under the section 202 housing for the elderly program and the section 811 housing for persons with disabilities program . the bill specifies that the funds can be provided through grants or loans , but does not specify how hud should allocate the funds .