ngb charter . the law ( section 1813 ( b ) ) transferred authority for prescribing the ngb charter to the secretary of defense , consistent with cngr recommendation 12 . ngb a joint activity of dod . the law ( section 1812 ( a ) ) established the ngb as a joint activity of the department of defense , consistent with cngr recommendation 9 . ngb chief advisory role . section 1811 ( c ) of the law corresponded closely with the first part of cngr recommendation 10 . new function of the ngb . section 1813 ( a ) of the law was consistent with cngr recommendation 11 . in other areas , the law differs somewhat from the cngr recommendations: determining requirements and budgeting for domestic response capabilities . section 1815 of the law was similar in certain respects to the recommendations provided by the cngr , but differed in other areas . a description of these similarities and differences is beyond the scope of this report . see cngr recommendations 1 , 3 , 4 , and 5 . planning for disasters and terrorism . the requirement for a plan to respond to natural disasters or terrorist attacks contained in section 1814 of the law was different than what was recommended by the cngr . cngr recommendation 19 proposed that "u.s. northern command should develop plans for consequence management and support to civil authorities that account for state - level activities and incorporate the use of national guard and reserve forces as first military responders. the following topic was not specifically addressed by the cngr: selection of ngb chief . the provision ( section 1811 ( a ) ) modifying the process for recommending an officer as chief of the national guard bureau concerned a topic which was not specifically addressed in the cngr report . the law brought the recommendation process for ngb chief into greater harmony with the process used for recommending officers for other o - 9 and o - 10 positions . specifically , it added requirements related to joint duty experience and capability to serve effectively in the position . this provision was generally consistent with language on page 94 the cngr report which states "...reserve component officers should be held to the same standards as applied to active component officers under goldwater - nichols , although the methods of attaining those standards may be different . if all officers must meet the same qualifications for promotion to any grade , the legitimacy of the selection of reserve component officers to senior grades and of their nominations to positions of importance and responsibility will be unassailable. reference ( s ) : crs report rl33571 , the fy2007 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel policy issues , pp . commission on the national guard and reserves , second report to congress , march 1 , 2007 , available at http: / / www.cngr.gov . crs point of contact ( poc ) : [author name scrubbed] at x[phone number scrubbed] . background: in early 2006 , dod proposed increases in tricare prime enrollment fees for retired personnel under age 65 , but section 704 of the fy2007 john warner national defense authorization act ( p.l .