this and other concerns are discussed below . from a climate change perspective , the location of an emission activity does not matter: a ton of co 2 ( or its equivalent in another ghg ) reduced in the united states and a ton sequestered in another nation would have the same result on the atmospheric concentration of ghgs . moreover , unlike many air pollutants — eg , acid rain precursors sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide , particulate matter , and mercury — a localized increase or decrease of co 2 emissions does not directly impart corresponding local or regional consequences . this attribute of co 2 emissions , the primary ghg , allows for offset opportunities . if allowed as part of an emissions reduction program , offsets have the potential to provide various benefits . the ability to generate offsets may provide an incentive for non - regulated sources to reduce , avoid , or sequester emissions ( where these actions would not have occurred if not for the offset program ) ; expand emission mitigation opportunities , thus reducing compliance costs for regulated entities ; offer environmental co - benefits for certain projects ; support sustainable development in developing nations ; and create new economic opportunities and spur parties to seek new methods of generating offsets . the main concern with offset projects is whether or not they produce their stated emission reductions . to be credible , an offset ton should equate to a ton reduced from a direct emission source , such as a smokestack or exhaust pipe . if offset projects generate emission credits for activities that would have occurred anyway ( i.e. , in the absence of the emission trading program ) , these credits would not satisfy the principle of additionality . for many offset projects , determining additionality will likely pose a challenge . other offset implementation issues — baseline estimation , permanence , accounting , monitoring — may present difficulties as well . if illegitimate offset credits flow into the trading program , the cap would effectively expand and credible emissions reductions would be undermined . the program would fail to meets its ultimate objective: overall ghg emissions reductions . offset projects vary by the quantity of emission credits they could generate and the implementation complexity they present . these issues are discussed below in greater detail . although offsets have the potential to provide benefits under an emissions trading program , several issues associated with offsets have generated concern and some controversy . perhaps the primary concern regarding offsets is their integrity . to be credible , an offset should equate to an emission reduction from a direct emission source , such as a smokestack or exhaust pipe . this issue is critical , if offsets are to be used in an emissions trading program . however , implementing this objective would likely present challenges . for instance , domestic landfill methane projects are comparatively simple to measure and verify , but offer a relatively small quantity of offsets . in contrast , biological sequestration activities , particularly forestry projects , offer the most offset - generating potential , but many of these projects pose multiple implementation challenges .