other legislation — h.r . 1002 , s. 364 , and s. 796 — seek to reduce the rise in chinese imports by addressing china's alleged policy of intentionally undervaluing its currency. however , increases in production tended to occur in china and in india . mexico's clothing exports slipped 2.9% . china was repeatedly cited in these studies as a major beneficiary of the termination of quotas . in summary , there was a fairly broad consensus on several aspects of clothing and textile trade after the termination of the atc . analysts generally agreed that: global trade in clothing and textiles would grow more quickly after the removal of quotas ; china and india would increase their market shares for both clothing and textile exports , but there was no consensus on the amount of this increase , estimates for china varied from 3% to 10% ; the united states would import more of its clothing and textiles from china , ranging from one - third two - thirds of its imports ; u.s. clothing and textile manufacturers would reduce their operations , shut down factories and lay off workers due to increased competition from china , india and other suppliers ; one study estimated up to 630,00 job losses due to chinese imports ; preferential trade arrangements may buffer the impact of the quota removal for clothing and textile manufacturers in the caribbean , south and central america , the middle east , and africa ; there is a possibility that the united states , the eu , and other wto members may impose trade remedies in response to the increase in imports from china , india and other asian suppliers . global trade figures for clothing provide partial confirmation of the experts' predictions for gains for china and india in post - atc trade ( see table 3 ) . between 2004 and 2005 , total clothing exports increased by almost $16.5 billion , or 6.4% . china's clothing exports , however , rose by $12.3 billion — an increase of 19.9% . india's clothing exports in 2005 also rose substantially , up $1.7 billion , or 25.0% over the year before . no other major clothing exporter experienced growth of over $1 billion between 2004 and 2005 . together , china and india captured nearly 85% of the increase in clothing trade between 2004 and 2005 . among the major clothing exporters , the losers were hong kong , mexico , romania and the united states . hong kong's domestic exports of clothing decreased by just over $900 million between 2004 and 2005 , a decline of 11.1% . romania experienced a slight decline of a little over $90 million , while u.s. clothing exports dipped by about $61 million . for the initial year of the post - atc era , global trade in clothing appears to be less a story of shifting production as one of emerging centers of growth . while south korea and taiwan , both modest exporters of clothing when the atc was in effect , experienced export declines of 23.9% and 20.0% respectively , most of the major clothing exporters did not see a sharp drop in their exports .