an appeal is pending . in the second decision , central valley chrysler jeep , inc. v. goldst e ne , a district court similarly rejected claims that california's regulation of ghg emissions from cars and trucks was precluded by epca , preempted by epca , and preempted as an intrusion on federal authority over foreign policy . an appeal is pending in this case as well . the legal theories pressed in the crombie and goldst e ne cases are similar to those in two rhode island suits , consolidated as li ncoln dodge , inc. v. sullivan , challenging that state's adoption of the california standards . recently , the district court held that the claims of the auto manufacturers and trade associations in this case were barred by collateral estoppel , a legal doctrine that prohibits parties from relitigating issues they have already adjudicated ( as these plaintiffs had done in crombie and goldstene ) . the rhode island auto dealers , by contrast , had themselves never raised the issues in the case , and thus were held to be viable plaintiffs , allowing the case to proceed . in a fourth preemption case , new mexico's adoption of the california ghg standards has been challenged as preempted under epca in zangara dodge , inc. v. curry . in considering whether to reverse the bush administration's stance on the california waiver , the incoming administration faces several important decisions regarding the potential for greenhouse gas regulations . epa has now received at least eight petitions asking the agency to regulate ghgs from different sources , including cars and trucks , aircraft , ocean - going ships , nonroad engines and equipment ( such as locomotives , construction equipment , farm equipment , forklifts , harbor craft , and lawn and garden equipment ) , and fuels — in addition to the california waiver request . the agency also faces lawsuits seeking to force it to regulate ghgs from stationary sources , including power plants , petroleum refineries , and the portland cement industry . a decision on any of the petitions is likely to be seen as a precedent for the others , and would have implications for the agency's position in the pending waiver - denial litigation . the incoming obama administration is sympathetic to greenhouse gas controls . at the same time , both congressional leaders and president obama have stated their intention to make the passage of economy - wide ghg controls a priority . a decision on the california waiver and the other pending petitions needs to be viewed , therefore , in the context of its potential impact on such legislation as well as the precedent it might set for ghg regulations under existing caa authority . from statements made during the election campaign , president obama appears poised to reverse epa's denial of the waiver request , and since his inauguration , the president has ordered epa to review the decision . in general , a regulation ( or "rule" ) can be reversed by following the same procedural steps that were taken to promulgate it .