art . i , sec . 9 , cl . 7 of the constitution states that , "no money shall be drawn from the treasury , but in consequence of appropriations made by law. with respect to all appropriations laws and other legislation enacted after the date of the order , the executive order directs each agency head to take all necessary steps to ensure that agency spending decisions are based on the text of laws and not on language in legislative history documents or other congressional communications to agencies and otherwise to implement the policy that earmarks should be included in the text of bills voted upon by congress and presented to the president . the supreme court in lincoln v. vigil unanimously acknowledged a premise upon which the executive order appears to be based: language in legislative history documents does not legally bind agencies unless it is enacted in the text of a statute . [a] fundamental principle of appropriations law is that where "congress merely appropriates lump sum amounts without statutorily restricting what can be done with those funds , a clear inference arises that it does not intend to impose legally binding restrictions , and indicia in committee reports and other legislative history as to how funds should or are expected to be spent do not establish any legal requirements on" the agency . ltv aerospace corp. , 55 comp . gen. 307 , 309 ( 1975 ) ; cf . , american hospital assn . v. nlrb , 499 u.s. 606 , 616 ( 1991 ) ( statements in committee reports do not have the force of law ) ; tva v. hill , 437 u.s. 153 , 191 ( 1978 ) ( "expressions of committees dealing with requests for appropriations cannot be equated with statutes enacted by congress." put another way , a lump sum appropriation reflects a congressional recognition that an agency must be allowed "flexibility to shift ... funds within a particular ... appropriation account so that" the agency "can make necessary adjustments for 'unforeseen developments' and 'changing requirements.' ltv aerospace corp. , supra , at 318 ( citation omitted. ) ... of course , an agency is not free simply to disregard statutory responsibilities: congress may always circumscribe agency discretion to allocate resources by putting restrictions in the operative statutes ( though not , as we have seen , just in the legislative history ) . a year later in shannon v , united states , the court emphasized this point when it observed that , "we are not aware of any case ... in which we have given authoritative weight to a single passage of legislative history that is in no way anchored in the text of a statute.... we agree with the d.c . circuit that "courts have no authority to enforce [a] principl[e] gleaned solely from legislative history that has no statutory reference point. the court in the lincoln case quoted from ltv aerospace corp . , a decision of the comptroller general , who heads the government accountability office ( gao ) , formerly the general accounting office .