tanf is not just a welfare program . the 1996 law granted states permission to use funds for a wide range of benefits , services , and activities to address some of the social and economic ills afflicting disadvantaged families with children . states may use their funds in any manner "reasonably calculated" to further tanf's purpose , which is to provide states with the flexibility to achieve four goals set in statute: ( 1 ) provide assistance to needy families so that children may live in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; ( 2 ) end dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting work , job preparation , and marriage ; ( 3 ) reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and ( 4 ) promote the formation and maintenance of two - parent families . given the fixed funding of the tanf block grant , states are able to use the savings from the welfare caseload decline to fund other "nonwelfare" benefits , services , and activities . the cash welfare caseload has declined substantially and incentives are in place for states to seek further caseload declines . non - welfare support for the working poor has increased , both with tanf - funded benefits and services ( eg , child care ) and from other programs ( eg , earned income tax credit and state childrens' health insurance program ) . the "nonwelfare" part of tanf has the potential to help disadvantaged families with children through new and innovative ways . whether that is happening is an open question given the information gap on these activities . illuminating tanf's "nonwelfare" side might recast future discussions about tanf to reflect the changing context in which the block grant operates . there remained 12.8 million children living in families with incomes below the poverty threshold in 2006 . further , the percentage of babies born out - of - wedlock in 2006 was 38.9% — an all - time high . cash welfare reaches far fewer disadvantaged children than it did prior to welfare reform . the ratio of the average monthly number of children in families receiving cash welfare to the total number of children in poverty declined from about six out of ten in 1995 to less than three out of ten in 2006 . total funding in the tanf "system" comprises both the federal block grant to states and a state's own funds spent to meet a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement . figure 1 shows the uses of tanf and moe funds in fy2006 . it shows that the categories typically associated with a traditional cash welfare program — cash benefits , administrative costs , and work activities — accounted for only a little more than half of total tanf funds . congress debated reauthorization of the block grant during the 107 th through the 109 th congresses . comprehensive legislation to reauthorize and revise tanf did not pass during this period , and the program operated on the basis of a series of temporary extensions . the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .