they are navigational specialists for a particular harbor . they board ships at the entrance to a harbor ( with use of a pilot boat or in rare cases a helicopter ) and take position at the bridge alongside the master of the vessel ( or the officer in charge of the watch ) and other bridge crew . using his / her experience and intimate knowledge of the navigation through a particular harbor , the pilot will order instructions to the helmsmen to steer the ship through the harbor and may direct tugboats , if they are assisting . while the pilot is in command of the navigation of the ship through the harbor , the captain of the ship remains in command of the ship and retains ultimate responsibility for its safe passage . only under emergency situations is a captain likely to countermand the pilot's orders . often the pilot will board the ship with a computer laptop or other handheld device that contains his / her own set of charts for that harbor as well as ship tracking technology . important policy questions for congress include whether there is a need for further independent oversight of pilot performance ; whether vtss' should operate more like air traffic control centers ; and whether the pilot and ship captain should be required to agree on a passage plan before transiting a harbor ? ever - larger ships , difficult or challenging slow - speed handling characteristics of some of these ships , and rising port traffic that is increasingly foreign - flagged may be cause for a review of pilotage , vessel traffic services , and other safety - related navigation services in u.s. ports . this report describes the role of pilots and vtss in the safe navigation of ships in u.s. harbors and reviews the controversy over the governance of pilot associations , the appropriate level of interaction between the vts and pilot , and other proposals for improving the safety of harbor navigation . the report's focus is on the prevention of ship collisions and groundings in harbors and thus does not discuss oil spill response and clean - up . this report also does not discuss the legal liabilities of carriers and mariners in ship accidents . maritime pilots are hired by ocean carriers to take command of the navigation of their ships through harbors . the laptop may also be plugged into the ship's navigation console to incorporate the ship's navigation technology into the pilot's navigation software . when the pilot boards the ship , the captain is required to inform the pilot about the navigation particulars of the ship , such as the draft , air draft ( highest point on the vessel ) , and maneuvering characteristics . a "pilot card" is used for this purpose . although english is the required language of international shipping , language can be a barrier to expansive communication between the pilot and captain . to assist the pilot and crew with safe navigation , the coast guard has established vessel traffic services ( vts ) in many ports .