bush . during the period beginning with the full implementation of the congressional budget process ( in fy1977 ) , six presidential transitions of administration have occurred . during this time , the three outgoing presidents required to submit a budget ( ford , carter , and reagan ) did so on or before the statutory deadline . as mentioned above , the three presidents who were not required to submit an outgoing budget ( george h.w . bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush ) chose to leave the budget submission to their respective successors . in past years , congress authorized the submission of a budget for a fiscal year after the statutory deadline by enacting a deadline extension in law . for example , the deadlines for submission of the budgets for fy1981 , fy1984 , and fy1986 were extended from mid - january to late - january or early - february by p.l . in its report on legislation that subsequently was enacted as p.l . 111-283 , pre - election presidential transition act of 2010 , hsgac wrote: "by codifying congress's view that candidates should start transition planning before the election , this legislation seeks to remove the stigma related to it and make pre - election transition planning an accepted part of a successful transition process. some individuals , who are serving in appointed ( noncareer ) positions in the executive branch , convert to career positions in the competitive service , the senior executive service ( ses ) , or the excepted service . this practice , commonly referred to as "burrowing in," is permissible when laws and regulations governing career appointments are followed . while such conversions may occur at any time , frequently they do so during the transition period when one administration is preparing to leave office and another administration is preparing to assume office . generally , these appointees were selected noncompetitively and are serving in such positions as schedule c , noncareer ses , or limited tenure ses that involve policy determinations or require a close and confidential relationship with the department or agency head and other top officials . many of the schedule c appointees receive salaries at the gs - 12 through gs - 15 pay levels . the noncareer and limited tenure members of the ses receive salaries under the pay schedule for senior executives that also covers the career ses . career employees , on the other hand , are to be selected on the basis of merit and without political influence following a process that is to be fair and open in evaluating their knowledge , skills , and experience against that of other applicants . the tenure of noncareer and career employees also differs . the former are generally limited to the term of the administration in which they are appointed or serve at the pleasure of the person who appointed them . the latter constitute a workforce that continues the operations of government without regard to the change of administrations . the section is divided into two topics — agency federal records and presidential records — because both types of records are generated during a presidential administration and federal law places unique requirements on each .