, unbundling ) . identifying and investigating fraud . ensuring that medicare pays only for services for which it has primary responsibility . attorneys offices opened 1,116 new criminal and 942 new civil health care fraud investigations . for comparison , doj prosecutors and u.s . attorneys offices opened 1,014 new criminal and 886 new civil health care fraud investigations in fy2009 . medicare beneficiaries also are a source for detecting fraud . estimates of the dollar amount lost just to health care fraud vary . fraud analysts and law enforcement officials estimate between 3% and 10% of health care expenditures ( for all payers , including medicare ) are lost annually to fraud . cms estimated that medicare's fy2010 ffs improper payment error rate was 10.5% and accounted for $34.3 billion in overpayments . not only do fraud and abuse contribute to rising health care costs , they also can harm patients , particularly when medically necessary services are withheld , or when medically unnecessary services are provided . fraud and abuse often are integrated together into the discussion of program integrity or activities to protect the medicare program from these threats . abuse describes incidents or practices of providers , physicians , or suppliers of services and equipment which , although not usually fraudulent , are inconsistent with accepted sound medical , business , or fiscal practices . these practices may , directly or indirectly , increase medicare costs , result in improper payment , payment for services below professionally recognized standards , or payment for services that were medically unnecessary . fraud is intentional deception or misrepresentation that an individual makes , knowing it to be false and that it could result in some unauthorized benefit to them . with the passage of hipaa , hhs was assured of stable funding that it could commit to medicare anti - fraud activities . a limited number of performance statistics and reports are available to help policy makers evaluate medicare's program integrity efforts , and these tend to be broad measures , such as return on investment . some studies , to date , generally examined the performance of the hcfac and mip programs separately , but these also have been limited . the hcfac and mip programs authorize appropriations with relatively broad requirements for the program integrity activities to be conducted . under hipaa , the hhs / oig and the attorney general were required to jointly submit an annual report to congress that identified the hcfac amounts appropriated and recovered , including transfers to the medicare trust funds resulting from criminal fines , civil monetary penalties , property forfeitures , and other penalties and damages . contractors investigating anomalies in billing patterns may also contact beneficiaries to verify that the services claimed actually were received by the beneficiary . medicare program integrity and anti - fraud activities are funded through the hcfac and mip programs . hcfac and mip were both established by hipaa , which sought to increase and stabilize federal funding for health care anti - fraud activities . specifically , hcfac funds are directed to the enforcement and prosecution of health care fraud , whereas mip funding supports the program integrity activities undertaken by cms contractors .