these are briefly described below . previously , the hea specified that guaranty agencies had an obligation to ensure that llr loans would be made available to students eligible to borrow subsidized stafford loans , but who were unable to obtain them . in accordance with department of education regulations implementing the llr program , a lender - of - last - resort would be required to make subsidized stafford loans and unsubsidized stafford loans available to students eligible to receive subsidized stafford loans ; and would be permitted to make unsubsidized stafford loans and plus loans available to other eligible borrowers . under the ecasla , the llr program is amended to require guaranty agencies to make llr loans available to students and parents who are eligible for , but unable to obtain , subsidized stafford loans , unsubsidized stafford loans , or plus loans ; or who attend an institution designated for institution - wide student qualification for llr loans ( described below ) . as noted above , under prior law , individual students became eligible to borrow llr loans upon the receipt of two rejected loan applications . the ecasla amended the llr program to temporarily authorize the secretary , through june 30 , 2009 , to also designate institutions for institution - wide participation in the llr program , at an institution's request . 110-350 further extends this authority through june 30 , 2010 . in order to designate an ihe for institution - wide participation , the secretary may require an ihe to demonstrate that , despite due diligence , it has been unable to secure the commitment of ffel program lenders to make loans to students attending the institution ; demonstrate that the number or percentage of students attending the institution who are unable to obtain ffel program loans exceeds a minimum threshold ; and meet other requirements as determined appropriate by the secretary . institution - wide student qualification makes all students who attend the institution , and the parents of dependent students who attend the institution , eligible to borrow llr loans . in implementing this provision , ed is requiring institutions seeking designation for institution - wide student qualification for llr loans to demonstrate that , through coordination with the guaranty agency designated for its state , the institution has made a minimum of three attempts to find eligible lenders willing to make conventional ( non - llr ) ffel program loans and that at least 80% of the students and parents of students at the institution have been unable to obtain conventional ffel program loans . institutions must provide documentation of this information to the guaranty agency . the guaranty agency will then forward this information , along with its opinion of the institution's eligibility , to ed , which will make a final determination . statutory and regulatory provisions of the ffel program establish the maximum interest rates and fees that may be paid by borrowers . lenders in the ffel program have often competed for borrowers by offering different packages of interest rate and fee discounts . to attract borrowers , lenders may pay origination fees or default fees without passing on the cost to students .