they include . the united states could seek to counter china's global activities by reinvigorating u.s. engagement around the world , including the expansion of u.s. public diplomacy . in asia , this could include more active participation in building the emerging economic and political / security architectures of the region . this could include seeking observer status or outright membership in the sco and the eas , and more active participation in the asean regional forum . the united states also could make concrete policy proposals to reinvigorate the asia - pacific economic cooperation forum ( apec ) as a vehicle for u.s. soft power influence in asia . does the prc feel strong and confident internationally or weak and uncertain ? these questions remain unanswered . many have written on china's foreign policy decision making . although china's foreign policymaking has become more regularized in recent years , few claim to be certain about how china's decisions are made , about who makes them , or about what long - term goals chinese policies seek to attain . some profess certainty ; but they have not been able to demonstrate that their convictions lead to any sort of consistency in analyzing or predicting china's foreign policy decisions . in the aftermath of incidents of sino - u.s. tension or confrontation — such as the case in 2001 when a chinese fighter jet collided with a u.s. ep - 3 reconnaissance plane , or the case in 2007 when the prc suddenly denied hong kong port visits to a series of u.s. ships — u.s . officials have remained largely in the dark about the prc's crisis management processes and about why and how prc leaders reached their decisions . the number of unknown variables that still animate china's foreign policy decision - making processes is simply too great . these variables include uncertainties about the clashes and respective strengths of internationalists and hardliners in chinese politics , about whether and how the interests of various prc bureaucracies compete and conflict on a given issue , and about the extent to which bureaucratic actors seek to undermine policies that they see as disadvantageous to them . given these uncertainties , there appears to be no "magic bullet" then — no individual or group with proven answers — that definitively can inform u.s. views or prepare u.s. government and congressional actors on how best to address the challenges china poses to u.s. and global interests . relatedly , study of prc international influence is hampered by a lack of reliable data on chinese foreign aid and by lack of transparency on whether and how the prc makes and implements large , high - profile investment agreements . according to one 2007 study directed by the international monetary fund ( imf ) , china's outward foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in 2005 was 5 percent that of the united states , with 80 percent apparently going to the tax havens of hong kong , cayman islands , and the british virgin islands , its final destinations impossible to trace . the prc does provide assistance to other countries , aid which comes from multiple government agencies with little or no apparent oversight .