part 182 . however , this list of gras substances is not exhaustive as "[i]t is impracticable to list all substances that are [gras] for their intended use. the list of gras substances in 21 c.f.r . part 182 includes spices , essential oils , natural extracts , synthetic flavoring substances , substances that migrate from dry food packaging and paper products , multipurpose substances , anticaking agents , chemical preservatives , emulsifying agents , stabilizers , sequestrants , and nutrients . the fda commissioner can affirm the gras status of a substance based on a petition from a manufacturer or others or on his or her own initiative . substances affirmed as gras , listed in 21 c.f.r . part 184 , differ from the gras substances listed in part 182 because their gras status has been sustained through a notice - and - comment rulemaking . the concept of affirming the gras status of substances began in 1969 , when questions arose about whether cyclamate salts , a substance that had been considered gras , were safe because "they were implicated in the formation of bladder tumors in rats. the affirmation of gras status occurs through the notice and comment rulemaking process , in which the commissioner publishes a notice of the substance proposed to be affirmed as gras in the federal register , allows 60 days for comments , evaluates the comments ( and the petition , if one was filed ) , and either ( 1 ) publishes a notice in the federal register affirming the substance is gras if there is "convincing evidence" or ( 2 ) "concludes that there is a lack of convincing evidence that the substance is gras and that it should be considered a food additive" subject to premarket approval by the fda under ffdca â§ 409 . if the agency affirms that the use of a substance is gras , the substance is added to a list in the code of federal regulations as a substance affirmed as gras "for the purposes and under the conditions prescribed," allowing for the possibility that use of a substance under a condition other than the one specified in the regulation may not be gras . the fda has reviewed the direct food substances on the list in part 184 and determined that they are gras "for the purposes and under the conditions prescribed. these ingredients are also gras as indirect food ingredients , also known as food contact substances , within certain limitations . part 186 of title 21 , code of federal regulations , lists the indirect food substances / food contact substances affirmed as gras , such as wrappers , containers , and other food - contact surfaces . if the commissioner reviews a food ingredient and finds that it is a gras substance , under 21 c.f.r . â§ 184.1 , the final rule approving the gras substance for the purposes and under the conditions prescribed may contain limits on the application and use of the substance . first , the regulation identifies the characteristics of the ingredient in such a way that it can be differentiated from other versions of the ingredient that the fda has not affirmed as gras .