is there a positive side to dollar depreciation ? economic theory suggests that the dollar's path can be influenced by a variety of factors that could confer to the united states both benefits and costs , and in some circumstances a depreciating currency can be , on balance , beneficial . this report examines the several factors that are likely to influence the dollar's medium - term path ; why further depreciation could occur ; what effects a depreciating dollar could have on the economy , including the pace of economic recovery ; and how alternative policy measures might influence the dollar's path . since the break - up of the bretton woods international monetary system in 1973 , the exchange rate of the dollar has been largely determined by the market — the supply and demand for dollars in global foreign exchange markets . dollars are demanded by foreigners to buy dollar denominated goods and assets . ( assets include bank accounts , stocks , bonds , and real property. ) dollars are supplied to the foreign exchange markets by americans exchanging them for foreign currencies typically needed to buy foreign goods and assets . since the mid - 1990s , the united states has had a growing trade deficit in goods transactions , generating a net increase in the supply of dollars on the foreign exchange markets , thereby exerting downward pressure on the dollar's exchange rate . at the same time , the united states has had an equal - sized surplus in asset transactions , reflecting a net increase in the demand for dollars on the foreign exchange market , thereby exerting upward pressure on the dollar's exchange rate . in most circumstances , however , there is a strong expectation that asset - market transactions will tend to be dominant and ultimately dictate the exchange rate's direction of movement . this dominance is the result of gross asset - market transactions occurring on a scale and at a speed that greatly exceeds what occurs with goods - market transactions . electronic exchange makes most asset transfers nearly instantaneous and , in most years , u.s. - international asset transactions were two to three times as large as what would be needed to simply finance that year's trade deficit . in 2007 , near the peak of the last economic expansion , the u.s. capital account recorded $1.5 trillion in purchases of foreign assets by u.s. residents ( representing a capital outflow ) and $2.1 trillion in purchases of u.s. assets by foreign residents ( representing a capital inflow ) . so while the united states could have financed the $702 billion trade deficit in goods and services in 2007 simply by a $702 billion sale of assets to foreigners , u.s. and foreign investors engaged in a much larger volume of pure asset trading . economic theory suggests that several economic factors could influence the direction of cross - border asset flows . standard economic analysis suggests that a sustained depreciation in the value of the dollar in international exchange has several likely effects , positive and negative , on the u.s. economy . other impacts of a depreciating dollar are more problematic , but are potential risks .