these amendments are described below . the heoa amends the tila to make it applicable to all private education loans ( i.e. , loans not made , insured , or guaranteed under title iv of the hea ; and that are issued expressly for expenses included as part of a student's coa ) , regardless of the amount of such loans . lenders of private education loans are prohibited from directly or indirectly offering or providing gifts to an ihe or its employees in exchange for any advantage related to the business of making private education loans ; from engaging in revenue sharing with an ihe ; and from co - branding with an ihe in the marketing of private education loans . employees of the financial aid office of an ihe , or who otherwise have responsibilities with respect to private educational loans , and who serve on an advisory board , commission , or group established by a lender of private education loans are prohibited from receiving anything of value from the lender , except for the reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred as a result of such service . lenders of private education loans are also prohibited from imposing pre - payment penalties on borrowers . the heoa amends the tila to require lenders of private education loans to disclose to borrowers detailed information about the terms and conditions of loans , and the right to cancel within three days of consummation , in applications and solicitations , at the time of loan approval , and at the time of consummation . borrowers of private education loans must be provided 30 days to accept the terms and conditions of the loan and to consummate the transaction , with no changes ( other than adjustments to interest rates based on an index ) . lenders are also prohibited from consummating private education loans without first obtaining private education loan self - certification forms ( specified under hea title i , part e ) from borrowers . the heoa amends the truth in lending act to subject lenders of private educational loans to civil liability for the failure to disclose required information about the terms and conditions of private education loans , including the right to cancel . borrowers of private educational loans may sue for damages regarding violations of the terms of disclosure until one year following the date on which the first payment of principal is due . the heoa amends the cra as follows . the cra is amended to require federal financial supervisory agencies to consider low - cost education loans made to low - income borrowers as a factor in assessing the record of a financial institution in meeting the credit needs of its entire community ( including low - and moderate - income neighborhoods , consistent with the safe and sound operation of such institution ) . the heoa requires the financial literacy and education commission to identify programs that promote or enhance financial literacy for college students , evaluate the effectiveness of those programs , promote those that are most effective , and encourage ihes to implement effective financial education programs . the commission is also required to report to congress on the state of financial literacy at ihes .