his academic training is as a lawyer . he is viewed by many in russia and the west as one of the most liberal of the generally illiberal cadre surrounding putin . one day after his anointment , medvedev announced that , if elected , he would ask putin to serve as prime minister . alternatively , putin might plan on remaining as a powerful prime minister for a year or two while making sure that medvedev is an able and loyal successor — and be prepared to push medvedev aside if the younger man proved unsatisfactory . but in this view , if medvedev proved himself to be a worthy successor in putin's eyes , putin would gradually relinquish command of the ship of state , leaving the helm in medvedev's hands . russia is not as central to u.s. interests or the u.s. role in the world as was the soviet union in the cold war era . but developments in russia are still quite important to the united states . russia remains a nuclear superpower and will play a major role in determining the national security environment in europe , the middle east , and asia . russia is also a major economic power with vast oil and gas reserves . the war on terrorism , arms control , efforts to contain wmd proliferation , the future of nato , and energy security , inter alia , may all be affected by developments in russia . important specific , immediate issues on the u.s. - russian agenda include missile defense in europe , kosovo , and iran's nuclear activities . some observers believe that the identity of the individual who wields power in the kremlin after 2008 is not particularly important , because putin has already succeeded in reestablishing traditional russian authoritarianism and statism , i.e . : putinism will prevail with or without putin . others argue that russia's post - soviet political evolution is still a work in progress , that the policies and preferences of russia's paramount leader can be decisive in setting the nations' course – and its relations with the united states – as was the case when mikhail gorbachev ascended to the kremlin and adopted policies that wrought profound , albeit sometimes unintended , consequences . the question of whether medvedev's election victory results in an actual transfer of power is in itself an important issue . if medvedev replaces putin as "the decider," the act of honoring the two - consecutive - term constitutional limit itself will strengthen the rule of law in russia . if , on the other hand , it turns out that putin succeeds himself in one way or another , that will reinforce the tradition that russia is ruled not by laws , but by men . it may not necessarily be true that a more democratic russia will be a more friendly and accommodating partner for the united states .