ambassador to pakistan . 05 / 23 / 07 — it was reported that u.n. officials were investigating allegations from 2005 that pakistani peacekeepers trafficked gold and weapons with congolese militia members rather than disarm them . 05 / 24 / 07 — the european parliament voted 522-9 to adopt a report on kashmir prepared by baroness emma nicholson in november 2006 . the report discusses the impact of the october 2005 earthquake in azad kashmir and the response of the pakistani government , the dialogue between india and pakistan regarding the loc , and confidence building measures implemented by both countries . the pakistan foreign office said the "numerous factual inaccuracies , distortions and extraneous elements" detract from the "objectivity and credibility" of the report . a relative was killed with him . 05 / 07 / 07 — several markets in lahore remained open until 9:00 p.m. or later , defying the directive of the water and power development authority ( wapda ) to close by 8:00 p.m. to conserve energy and reduce the periods of power outages . 05 / 08 / 07 — armed men attacked a construction company in baluchistan . one worker was killed , one was wounded , and three were kidnapped . employees refused to continue working until security was improved . 05 / 09 / 07 — the government of pakistan contributed $5 million to unhcr towards the repatriation program for afghan refugees . on the same day , the united nations and other aid agencies suspended all work in the area of pakistani kashmir devastated by the october 2005 earthquake after a house occupied by two aid workers was torched by suspected islamists . clerics and an organization called the joint action committee had warned the organizations against hiring women . 05 / 10 / 07 — police arrested 12 suspects accused of plotting a terrorist attack in karachi at a rally for the chief justice scheduled for may 12 , 2007 . as a result , the pakistani interior minister asked the chief justice to postpone travel to karachi , but the latter refused . the budget projected a deficit of 398 billion rupees and a growth target of 7.2% . up to 275 billion rupees were allocated for defense , an increase of 25 billion . the government proposed to spend 520 billion rupees on public sector development to generate jobs . on the same day , pakistani president musharraf withdrew the amended pemra ordinance after broadcasters vowed to develop a new code of conduct in three days . also , a heat wave killed as many as 285 people around the country in a few days . temperatures in lahore , at 118°f , were the highest in 78 years . finally , a bomb blast outside a hotel in the town of hub in baluchistan killed three people and wounded nine . 06 / 10 / 07 — pakistan agreed to join the global initiative to combat nuclear terrorism . according to the ministry of foreign affairs , pakistan "declared that the global initiative does not cover pakistan's military nuclear facilities or activities" but only civilian plants and actions .