the eruption of a global credit crunch in august 2007 strained the ars market . in february 2008 , major investment banks finally pulled the plug on auctions , leading to the collapse of the ars market . the collapse of the auction - rate securities market put substantial strains on investors who had thought they were investing in highly liquid cash equivalents . once ars markets began to fail in large numbers , many investors were left with illiquid assets with maturities of 10 years or more . many issuers , such as municipalities , universities , and student lenders , were faced with steeply higher interest costs . recent turmoil in ars markets has affected several policy areas of congressional concern . municipal securities backed by the power to tax and federally guaranteed student loans have comprised the largest segments of the auction - rate securities market . both municipal securities and securities backed by federally guaranteed student loans are generally considered to be extremely high quality assets . investor demand for such assets have traditionally been strong , even as investment vehicles evolve over time . the need for financial intermediation between investors requiring safe investments on one side and public borrowers and student lenders will continue , despite disruptions caused by the collapse of the ars market . some experts believe markets learn from financial crises , while others believe the gains that sophisticated financial engineering techniques can deliver in less tumultuous times and the natural turnover of financial market personnel make it unlikely that markets learn from past mistakes . whether or not financial markets learn from the past , decisions made by congress and regulatory agencies regarding financial reporting , oversight , and enforcement policies will continue to affect both the structure of financial markets and the behavior of market participants . investment banks running ars markets faced increasing difficulties in finding new buyers for arss . many institutional borrowers viewed auction - rate securities as a cheaper way of raising funds , compared to alternative borrowing strategies . interest rates for auction - rate securities are tied to short - term market interest rates , even though the securities themselves have longer maturities . in past decades , interest rates on short - term variable - rate securities have on average been lower than interest rates on long - term fixed - rate securities because investors usually require compensation to bear interest - rate risks embedded in long - maturity assets . while arss allowed issuers to borrow more cheaply in normal times , the role of ars auctions created inherent liquidity risks to investors and interest - rate reset risks to issuers . following the extraordinary turmoil in global financial markets that erupted in august 2007 , several interest - rate auctions for arss failed , which temporarily left investors unable to sell their ars holdings . while ars markets appeared to return to normalcy that fall , some large institutional investors had begun to withdraw funds from ars markets . a large number of ars auctions in 2007 and early 2008 avoided failure only because investment banks stepped up their support for ars auctions , which required them to take on larger ars inventories on their own accounts .