law . the state department criticized tni human rights abuses , including extensive criticisms in its 2003human rights report . however , high level bushadministration officials refrained from public criticism . president bush apparently did not raise aceh during hisvisit to indonesia in october 2003,concentrated exclusively on cooperation with indonesia against terrorism and the case of americans killed in papuain august 2002 . political negotiations were to ensue . the cease - fire initiallyreduced violence . however , it began to breakdown after february 2004 . independent observers agreed with the tni accusation that gam used the cease - fireto rearm and reorganize . gam cadrereportedly propagandized among villagers that independence would soon be achieved . gam delayed turning overarms to the international monitors . the tnirefused to withdraw from the specified forward positions . offices and automobiles of the international observerswere arsoned ; most observers accused the tniof these acts . the indonesian government , under apparent pressure from the tni , took uncompromising positionsin negotiations . it demanded that gamrenounce independence and accept special autonomy "within the framework of the unitary state of the republic ofindonesia. it refused to offer gam a role asa political party . in may 2003 , the tni arrested five gam negotiators who were preparing to fly to tokyo , the siteof talks . ( 9 ) they were subsequentlysentenced to 12-15 years imprisonment . in the spring of 2003 , the tni held a meeting of over 48 commanders in aceh . the apparent aim was to pressure the government to end the cease - fire and givethe tni full authority , including authority over the police . on may 18 , 2003 , president magawati declared martiallaw in aceh for six months . the tni andthe police deployed 45,000 troops into the province . security forces gained control over major towns and the mainroads ; security improved in these locales . gam guerrillas reportedly dispersed into smaller units "all over aceh," according to tni commander generalendriartono sutarto . ( 10 ) on december 31 , 2003,the police commander in aceh stated that since the imposition of martial law , 580 gam members and 470 civilianshad been killed ; 50 soldiers and 26policemen had been killed . the tni earlier had claimed over 1,000 gam members killed , apparently includingcivilians killed in the gam figure . innovember 2003 , president megawati extended martial law for another six months . the government also set forthpreconditions for negotiations , that gammust disband and accept "special autonomy. gam called for a european government to mediate the conflict . with martial law , the tni closed off aceh from contact with outsiders with a few exceptions under tni control . it provides for local elections . however , the specialautonomy law has not been implemented . the provincial government has not passed needed implementation legislation . according to a report by theinternational crisis group in july 2003 , the centralgovernment controls all policies and programs in aceh , and revenue from aceh's resources goes to the tni . theprovincial government is considered to becorrupt ; it is accused of siphoning off economic aid and humanitarian aid funds that pass through it . ( 8 ) the government also negotiated with gam .