the first , p.l . 115-56 , provided government - wide funding through december 8 , 2017 . 113-44 ) was enacted into law . on october 16 , 2013 , the senate passed h.r . 2775 , which had been previously passed by the house on september 12 , with an amendment . this amendment , in part , provided interim continuing appropriations for the previous year's programs and activities through january 15 , 2014 . later that same day , the house agreed to the senate amendment to h.r . the cr was signed into law on october 17 , 2013 ( p.l . 113-46 ) , thus ending the funding gap . at the beginning of fy2018 , none of the 12 regular appropriations bills had been enacted , so the federal government operated under a series of crs . the second , p.l . 115-90 , extended funding through december 22 , and the third , p.l . the antideficiency act ( 31 u.s.c . 1341-1342 , 1511-1519 ) generally bars the obligation or expenditure of federal funds in the absence of appropriations . the interval during a fiscal year when appropriations for a particular project or activity are not enacted into law , either in the form of a regular appropriations act or a cr , is referred to as a funding gap or funding lapse . although funding gaps may occur at the start of the fiscal year , they may also occur any time a cr expires and another cr ( or the relevant regular appropriations bill ) is not enacted immediately thereafter . multiple funding gaps may occur within a fiscal year . in 1980 and early 1981 , then - attorney general benjamin civiletti issued opinions in two letters to the president that have been put into effect through guidance provided to federal agencies under various office of management and budget ( omb ) circulars clarifying the limits of federal government activities upon the occurrence of a funding gap . the civiletti letters state that , in general , the antideficiency act requires that if congress has enacted no appropriation beyond a specified period , the agency may make no contracts and obligate no further funds except as "authorized by law. in addition , because no statute generally permits federal agencies to incur obligations without appropriations for the pay of employees , the antideficiency act does not , in general , authorize agencies to employ the services of their employees upon a lapse in appropriations , but it does permit agencies to fulfill certain legal obligations connected with the orderly termination of agency operations . the second letter , from january 1981 , discusses the more complex problem of interpretation presented with respect to obligational authorities that are "authorized by law" but not manifested in appropriations acts . in a few cases , congress has expressly authorized agencies to incur obligations without regard to available appropriations . more often , it is necessary to inquire under what circumstances statutes that vest particular functions in government agencies imply authority to create obligations for the accomplishment of those functions despite a lack of current appropriations .