the committee of the whole dissolves itself by "rising. if the committee has not completed consideration of the measure before it , the floor manager may offer a simple motion to rise . at a later time , the house may choose to resolve itself again into the committee of the whole to resume consideration of the same measure . the house must then formally agree to any amendments reported by the committee . therefore , it is possible that amendments that were adopted by the committee of the whole could be defeated by the house of representatives . the house may agree to all the amendments reported to it by the committee of the whole through one vote ( "en gros" ) , or separate votes may be demanded on any amendments agreed to in the committee . the votes on amendments could also be structured pursuant to the provisions of a "special rule" adopted earlier . votes are put on such amendments in the order in which they appear in the bill , not in the order by which the request was made . the house then considers , with the possibility of several intervening motions such as a motion to recommit , the question of final passage of the measure . the custom has its antecedents in english parliamentary practice . de alva stanwood alexander , an historian of the house of representatives and a former representative himself , wrote: this committee has a long history . it originated in the time of the stuarts , when taxation arrayed the crown against the [house of] commons , and suspicion made the speaker a tale - bearer to the king . to avoid the chair's espionage the commons met in secret , elected a chairman in whom it had confidence , and without fear of the king freely exchanged its views respecting supplies . the informality of its procedure survived the occasion for secrecy , but to this day the house of commons keeps up the fiction of concealment , the speaker withdrawing from the hall when the committee convenes , and the chairman occupying the clerk's desk . use of the committee of the whole in the current practice of the house of representatives has changed considerably from the form first used in 1789 . until the early 1800s , the house used committees of the whole to work out the broad outlines of major legislation . a select committee would then be appointed to draft a bill . when the select committee reported the bill to the house , the house would then refer the measure to a committee of the whole for debate and amendment before itself considering the question of passage . historian ralph volney harlow commended on the committee of the whole as a forum in which the broad outline of legislation could be discussed: the committee of the whole is really a compromise between a regular session , and an adjournment for purposes of discussion . the latter method could not be used to advantage in any large assembly , because some restraining influence would be necessary .