as a result , there has been a notable reduction in the proportion of technical training . in fy1995 , for example , technical training represented about 17% of the overall imet appropriation , while professional military education programs constituted over 50% of the appropriation . these facts raise the current issue of whether or not more resources , and possibly more funds , should be made available for technical training . it also reflects support for efforts to meet training requirements generated by 29 newly emerging democracies globally . the defense department expects the costs associated with the imet program to increase due to inflation , to growing requirements of central europe and the newly independent states ( nis ) , to the increasing popularity of expanded imet , and efforts to maintain existing programs in africa and latin america . in addition , since fy1994 , the united states has placed a strict limitation on the amount of technical and high - cost training in response to an earlier large reduction in imet funding . instead emphasis has been placed on the u.s. military services' senior service school programs , professional military educational efforts , expanded imet and english language training . this issue may become more acute as the united states attempts to advance its policy goals in nato enlargement ( which might well require training on nato interoperable systems ) , and in seeking to help imet participants enhance their ability to assume greater roles in international peacekeeping operations . however , any decision to provide additional funding for imet would mean that those funds could come at the expense of other programs , given current budgetary constraints . in recent years , american concerns with human rights practices of certain nations that were recipients of united states foreign aid has led to restrictions or conditions being placed on their participation in the imet program . in the case of indonesia , for example , congress has required that the president make a number of certifications about the actions of the indonesian government before funds can be provided under the expanded imet program . in some cases , the imet program represents the major current vehicle for contact between the united states military and its counterparts in countries with a record of human rights violations or a tradition of authoritarian or undemocratic governments . as reductions in the united states foreign military financing program ( fmf ) continue , imet is increasingly the remaining military assistance program that congress can use to sanction nations it finds to be abusing the human rights of its people . at the same time , imet may also be the only instrument available that might assist in changing the attitudes of military - dominated governments and lead to a reduction in human rights abuses and greater levels of democratic government . a current issue , then , is whether using imet restrictions to sanction nations with poor human rights records can be an effective means for modifying the behavior of their governments . students are also exposed to u.s. military procedures and the manner in which the military functions under civilian control .