some of these are protected with recognition or assistance by the nps . ยง320301 et seq. ) certain areas that receive technical or financial aid from the nps , but are neither federally owned nor directly administered by the nps , have been classified by the nps as affiliated areas . affiliated areas are nationally significant but do not meet the other criteria for inclusion in the park system . congress or the secretary of the interior may designate rivers as components of the national wild and scenic rivers system , and trails as part of the national trails system . the nps also supports local and state governments in protecting resources . the agency may provide grants for projects ( including acquisition and development of recreational facilities ) and technical assistance ( for conserving rivers , trails , natural areas , and cultural resources ) . initially , the obama administration also expressed a need to focus attention and resources on the current system , including the maintenance backlog , "rather than continuing the rapid expansion of new nps responsibilities. subsequently , in a number of instances the administration has testified in favor of creating new units of the national park system , studying additional areas , and expanding existing units . differences exist as to the relative importance of including areas reflecting u.s. natural , cultural , and social history . authorizes the president to create national monuments on land that is already federally owned or controlled , and that contains historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , or other objects of historic or scientific interest . presidents have designated 150 monuments since 1906 . congress has subsequently converted many of them , such as the grand canyon , to national parks . most monuments are managed by nps , with many newer monuments managed by the bureau of land management or other agencies . an act of congress creating a national park system unit may explain the unit's purpose ; set its boundaries ; provide specific directions for land acquisition , planning , uses , and operations ; and authorize appropriations for acquisition and development . bills to create units generally are within the jurisdiction of the house committee on natural resources and the senate committee on energy and natural resources , with appropriations typically contained in interior , environment , and related agencies' appropriations acts . congress sometimes has enacted free - standing legislation to add units to the national park system . congress also has authorized units as part of omnibus public land laws containing dozens of measures related to lands and recreation . legislation creating a new unit is often preceded by legislation to authorize an nps study of the area , as described below . provisions of law govern congress's consideration of measures to create units of the national park system . in 1998 , congress amended existing law pertaining to creating units ( p.l . 105-391 ) to standardize procedures , improve the information about potential additions , prioritize areas , focus on outstanding areas , and ensure congressional support for area studies .