stakeholders . stakeholders are watching to see how provisions of the new trade promotion authority law will become translated into trade agreements , to the extent that negotiatorsattempt toand are able to include them in future trade agreements . stakeholders against actually including labor provisions in the body of trade agreements argue that ( 1 ) such provisionsimpede the flow of free trade and are not needed ; ( 2 ) any labor and environment provisions could put u.s.companies atserious disadvantage vis - a - vis their competitors in the world trade organization ; ( 3 ) the u.s. - jordan languageshould be a"one time" occurrence rather than a precedent ; and ( 4 ) that potential violations of core labor standards should bepursuedmultilaterally through the international labor organization ( ilo ) rather than through trade agreements . the ilo,part of theunited nations , was established in 1919 to promote worker rights . as mentioned , it has no direct enforcementpowers,working instead through technical assistance and moral suasion . stakeholders in favor of including labor provisions in the body of trade agreements argue in favor of using the u.s. - jordanfta labor provisions as a model for other trade agreements . the afl - cio asserts that an even more elaboratemechanismthan is included in the u.s. - jordan fta is needed ( a ) to ensure that foreign labor laws are brought up tointernationalstandards on a clear timetable , and ( b ) to prevent the use of trade and investment agreements as business tools toforce downwages and working conditions in the united states and abroad . the u.s. - jordan fta continues and arguably advances the linkage of worker rights provisions and trade beyond thatcontained in the nafta labor side agreement . it does this: ( a ) by including the worker rights provisions in thebody of theagreement , and ( b ) by raising the possibility of "sanctions" in that either country may take "any appropriate andcommensurate measure" if the dispute procedures do not lead to resolution - even though letters exchanged by u.s.andjordan governments have pledged not to exercise those sanctions with regards to potential labor violations . thejordanagreement's influence was also felt in the reauthorization of tpa language which would continue to permit newtradeagreements to include provisions similar to those in the jordan agreement in the body of the agreement . the senate approved h.r . 2603 by a voice vote onseptember 24 . the government of jordan had already approved it on july 15 . it became law as p.l . during the senate debate , senator phil gramm warned that he will oppose any effort to turn theu.s. - jordanfta into a model for how future trade agreements should deal with worker rights ( and environmental protectionissues ) . he argued that they should not be part of trade deals . conversely , senate finance committee chairman maxbaucusindicated he hoped the u.s. - jordan fta would set a precedent for how future trade agreements would address issueslikelabor and the environment . he also refuted a statement made by senator graham that the provisions wouldundermine u.s.sovereignty or prevent lawmakers from enacting and enforcing u.s. labor and environmental laws .