the degree of international leverage is uncertain . indeed , the specter of regional instability may have made u.s. officials and others "more reluctant than ever to take risks" regarding settlement efforts . the u.n. secretary - general reported in april 2014 that "the cease - fire continues to hold and the people can live without fear of a resumption of armed conflict in the medium term. the polisario periodically threatens a return to armed struggle , but it appears unable to resume a military campaign without the aid and presumably the permission of algeria , which are not expected — despite enduringly poor morocco - algeria relations . the status of the territory under international law has complicated investor operations . if oil is found , it could conceivably heighten the stakes of the conflict for both parties . unhcr , the world food program , and international humanitarian organizations — funded by donors , including the united states — provide aid to the sahrawi refugees in tindouf . the camps are administered by the polisario , and algeria has not permitted unhcr to conduct a census of their inhabitants . this has led some observers to conclude that the total number of refugees may be lower than reported , and that the polisario may divert aid or use it as leverage to control the refugee population . as noted , there are few independent reports on conditions in the camps , and the number of refugees is disputed . socioeconomic hardships have reportedly contributed to "some degree of dissatisfaction" among the refugees , particularly the youth . as long as the western sahara issue is unresolved , relations between morocco and algeria are unlikely to be fully normalized . the border between the two countries has been closed by algeria since 1994 . the western sahara dispute is among the factors rendering the arab maghreb union , of which both morocco and algeria are members , largely inactive . minurso continues to operate in a challenging political and security environment . the mission regularly reports violations of the cease - fire accord . according to the u.n. secretary - general's april 2014 report to the security council , such violations "do not jeopardize [the cease - fire] in the medium term," but "they have resulted in a gradual shift in the military balance between the parties over the years," apparently in favor of morocco . while advocating the extension of minurso's mandate , the report states that , given the increase in the military build - up on the moroccan side of the berm , minurso's operational effectiveness "is being compromised by a shortage of military personnel. mission personnel operating east of the berm , meanwhile , are "exposed" to terrorist threats emanating from neighboring regions . minurso's budget , to which the united states contributes ( see below ) , has decreased slightly in recent years , from $65.4 million ( july 2011-june 2012 ) to $58.1 million ( july 2014-june 2015 ) . in april 2014 , the u.n. security council raised minurso's troop ceiling by 15 military observers , noting that it was supporting the secretary - general's request for the increase "within existing resources.