the noise control act of 1972 ( p.l . 92-574 ) and several other federal laws require the federal government to set and enforce noise standards for aircraft and airports , interstate motor carriers and railroads , workplace activities , engines and certain types of equipment , federally funded highway projects , and federally funded housing projects . exposure to sounds significantly below these levels are generally not considered harmful to human hearing . however , most individuals perceive unwanted sound above 65 dba to be intrusive , which can impair one's quality of life , depending on the sensitivity of the individual and the frequency and duration of exposure . some also argue that persistent exposure to intrusive sound may have certain physiological effects , such as headaches or nausea , even though one's hearing ability may not be impaired . there also have been some questions about the vibration - induced effects of low frequency sound , which can be felt but not heard . the noise control act also requires federal agencies to comply with all federal , state , and local noise requirements . various federal laws and regulations governing the administration of park and recreational lands owned by the federal government also provide authorities for agencies to regulate noise that would be generated from human activities on , and in the vicinity of , these lands . most federal noise standards focus on preventing hearing loss by limiting exposure to sounds of 90 dba and higher . some federal standards are stricter and focus on limiting exposure to lower levels of around 65 dba to protect quality of life . whether "quality - of - life" standards should be tightened has been an ongoing issue , particularly among communities located near transportation sources such as airports and highways , where exposure to noise is a daily or routine occurrence . as noted above , there also have been some questions about the effects of low frequency sound , but so far , noise standards in the united states have not regulated low frequency sound below the threshold of human hearing . major existing federal standards that regulate human exposure to noise , and the agencies responsible for setting and enforcing them , are discussed below . the federal role in regulating noise is primarily limited to transportation , workplace activities , certain types of equipment , and human activities on public lands owned by the federal government . state and local governments determine the extent to which other sources of noise are controlled , and regulations for such sources can vary widely among localities . further , some states do not directly regulate noise , but allow local governments to play the primary role . sources of noise commonly regulated at the state and local level include commercial , industrial , and residential activities . regulations for such sources typically control the public's exposure to noise by limiting certain activities to specific times , such as construction noise only during business hours . public concern about differing state and local control of noise has led some to suggest that the federal role should be expanded to regulate a greater variety of sources uniformly across the country .