you have done neither . stackley: if we need to incur those costs , they will be allowable costs . do you believe that it has ? sean stackley , acting secretary of the navy: sir , right now our estimate for cvn - 78 , we're trying to hold it within the $12.887 billion number that was established several years ago . we have included a $20 million [procurement funding] request in this budget pending our determination regarding repairs that required for the... mccain: is that a breach of nunn - mccurdy ? stackley: not at this point in time , sir , we're continuing to evaluate whether that additional funding will be required . we're doing everything we can to stay within the existing cap and we'll keep congress informed as we complete our post - delivery assessment . mccain: problem is we haven't been informed . so either you bust the cap and breach nunn - mccurdy — nunn - mccurdy or you notify us . you haven't done either one . stackley: sir , we've been submitting monthly reports regarding the carrier , we've alerted the concern regarding the repairs that are being required for the motor turbine generator set and we've acknowledged the risk associated with those repairs . however , what we're trying to do is not incur those costs , avoid cost by other means , and as of right now we're not ready to trip that cost cap . mccain: well , it's either not allowable or it's allowable . it's not allowable , then you take a certain course of action . if it's allowable then you're required to notify congress . we're trying to avoid that at this stage of time , sir . mccain: i agree , but we were supposed to be notified — ok . i can tell you that you are either in violation of nunn - mccurdy or you are in violation of the requirement that we be notified . you have done neither . there's two scenarios . stackley: sir , we have not broached the cost cap . if it becomes apparent that we'll need to go above the cost cap , we will notify congress within — within the terms that you all have established . mccain: ok. well , i'll get it to you in writing but you still haven't answered the question because when there's a $20 million cost overrun , it's either allowable and then we have to be notified in one way . if it's not allowable , nunn - mccurdy is — is reached . but anyway , maybe you can give us a more satisfactory explanation in writing , mr. secretary . june 2017 gao report a june 2017 gao report states the following: the cost estimate for the second ford - class aircraft carrier , cvn 79 , is not reliable and does not address lessons learned from the performance of the lead ship , cvn 78 . as a result , the estimate does not demonstrate that the program can meet its $11.4 billion cost cap . cost growth for the lead ship was driven by challenges with technology development , design , and construction , compounded by an optimistic budget estimate .