they usually affect private individuals only indirectly . proclamations in most instances affect primarily the activities of private individuals . since the president has no power or authority over individual citizens and their rights except where he is granted such power and authority by a provision in the constitution or by statute , the president's proclamations are not legally binding and are at best hortatory unless based on such grants of authority . the distinction between these instruments — executive orders , presidential memoranda , and proclamations — seems to be more a matter of form than of substance , given that all three may be employed to direct and govern the actions of government officials and agencies . moreover , if issued under a legitimate claim of authority and made public , a presidential directive could have the force and effect of law , "of which all courts are bound to take notice , and to which all courts are bound to give effect. the only technical difference is that executive orders and proclamations must be published in the federal register , while presidential memoranda are published only when the president determines that they have "general applicability and legal effect. just as there is no definition of executive orders , presidential memoranda , and proclamations in the u.s. constitution , there is , likewise , no specific provision authorizing their issuance . as such , authority for the execution and implementation of these written instruments stems from implied constitutional and statutory authority . in the constitutional context , presidential power is derived from article ii of the u.s. constitution , which states that "the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states," that "the president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states," and that the president "shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed. the president's power to issue these directives may also derive from express or implied statutory authority . despite the amorphous nature of the authority to issue executive orders , presidential memoranda , and proclamations , these instruments have been employed by every president since the inception of the republic . notably , executive orders historically have been more contentious as presidents have issued them over a wide range of controversial areas such as the establishment of internment camps during world war ii ; the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus ; and equal treatment in the armed services without regard to race , color , religion , or national origin . however , presidents have also used executive orders for arguably more mundane governing tasks such as directing federal agencies to evaluate their ability to streamline customer service delivery and establishing advisory committees . because there is no underlying constitutional or statutory authority that dictates the circumstances under which the president must issue an executive order , it is probable that the president also could have chosen to issue presidential memoranda rather than executive orders . as a matter or historical practice , however , it seems that presidents are more apt to utilize executive orders on matters that may benefit from public awareness or be subject to heightened scrutiny .