these issues are discussed below . force - protection procedures . before it arrived at aden for its brief refueling stop , the cole , like all visitingu.s . was the ship's threat condition consistentwith the very high threat condition beingmaintained at that time by the u.s. embassy in yemen ? although the fbi's investigative skills are critical to such investigations , some observers argue thatother skills outside the fbi's area ofspecialization , including having an in - depth understanding of foreign countries and cultures and the diplomaticability to ensure host nation cooperation , areequally important components of such investigations . clearly , small nations may feel overwhelmed by largenumbers of fbi agents and the political sensitivitiesof their insistence on questioning local witnesses / suspects . conferees on the fy2001 foreign operationsappropriations bill ( h.r . 4811 ) made $4million for counter - terrorism training in yemen contingent on fbi certification that yemen is fully cooperating inthe cole investigation . insuring coordination of any retaliatory response . an important challenge facing u.s. counter - terrorism officials isto ensure that u.s. actions for military / economic retaliation for terrorist attacks are adequately planned . the needfor maintaining secrecy in planning militaryactions can discourage interagency coordination , which in turn can create a potential for making a planning mistake . some observers argue that the u.s. cruisemissile attack on what some believe was a legitimate pharmaceutical factory in sudan in response to the 1998embassy bombings in east africa was a mistakecaused in part by lack of interagency coordination that deprived decisionmakers of important data which might haveinfluenced the target - selection process . ( 8 ) if itis determined that the attack was linked to bin ladin , a major issue is how the u.s. responds and prevents furtherattacks from a network that is believedresponsible for several anti - u.s. attacks since 1992 . the u.s. retaliatory attack on afghanistan in august 1998,a response to the east africa embassy bombings,did little to damage bin ladin's network or his ability to plan attacks . members and others have asked whether the risk of a terrorist attack against a u.s. ship in yemen was properlybalanced against the political / diplomatic goals ofimproving relations with yemen and encouraging its development toward a stable , pro - western , democratic countrythat does not support terrorism and cooperateswith u.s. efforts to contain iraq . in response , general tommy r. franks , the current commander - in - chief of u.s.central command , stated the followingregarding the process that led his predecessor , general anthony c. zinni , to the decision to use yemen for refuelingstops: the decision to go into aden for refueling was based on operational as well as geo - strategic factors and included anassessment of the terrorist and conventional threats in the region . as you know , the horn of africa was in greatturmoil in 1998 . we had continuing instability insomalia , the embassy bombings in kenya and tanzania , an ongoing war between ethiopia and eritrea , and aninternal war in sudan....as of december 1998 , 14 ofthe 20 countries in the uscentcom aor [u.s. central command area of responsibility] were characterized as"high threat"countries .