, deported . the category of criminal grounds has been of special concern in recent years , and the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 expanded and toughened the deportation consequences of criminal convictions . refugees are admitted from abroad . the ina also provides for the granting of asylum on a case - by - case basis to aliens physically present in the united states who meet the statutory definition of "refugee. all aliens must satisfy state department consular officers abroad and dhs bureau of customs and border protection inspectors upon entry to the u.s. that they are not ineligible for visas or admission under the so - called "grounds for inadmissibility" of the ina . these criteria categories are: health - related grounds ; criminal history ; national security and terrorist concerns ; public charge ( eg , indigence ) ; seeking to work without proper labor certification ; illegal entrants and immigration law violations ; lacking proper documents ; ineligible for citizenship ; and , aliens previously removed . some provisions may be waived or are not applicable in the case of nonimmigrants , refugees ( eg , public charge ) , and other aliens . all family - based immigrants entering after december 18 , 1997 , must have a new binding affidavit of support signed by a u.s. sponsor in order to meet the public charge requirement . the ina also specifies the circumstances and actions that result in aliens being removed from the united states , i.e. the category of terrorist grounds has also been broadened and tightened up by the usa patriot act of 2001 . the annual number of lprs admitted or adjusted in the united states rose gradually after world war ii , as figure 1 illustrates . however , the annual admissions never again reached the peaks of the early 20 th century . the bcis data present only those admitted as lprs or those adjusting to lpr status . the growth in immigration after 1980 is partly attributable to the total number of admissions under the basic system , consisting of immigrants entering through a preference system as well as immediate relatives of u.s. citizens , that was augmented considerably by legalized aliens . in addition , the number of refugees admitted increased from 718,000 in the period 1966-1980 to 1.6 million during the period 1981-1995 , after the enactment of the refugee act of 1980 . the immigration act of 1990 increased the ceiling on employment - based preference immigration , with the provision that unused employment visas would be made available the following year for family preference immigration . there are two major statistical perspectives on trends in immigration . one uses the official bcis admissions data and the other draws on bureau of census population surveys . the bcis data present only those admitted as lprs or those adjusting to lpr status . the census data , on the other hand , include all residents in the population counts , and the census asks people whether they were born in the united states or abroad . as a result , the census data also contain long - term temporary ( nonimmigrant ) residents and unauthorized residents .