wrda 1990 ( 33 u.s.c . 1252 , 2316 ) explicitly expanded the corps' mission to include environmental protection and increased the corps' responsibility for contamination cleanup , dredged material disposal , and hazardous waste management . wrda 1992 ( 33 u.s.c . 2326 ) authorized the corps to use the "spoils" from dredging in implementing projects for protecting , restoring , and creating aquatic and ecologically - related habitats , including wetlands . the 1944 flood control act ( 33 u.s.c . 708 ) significantly augmented the corps' involvement in large multi - purpose projects . environmental infrastructure refers to municipal water and wastewater facilities . changing national priorities and local needs , increasing construction costs , and completed projects at most prime locations decreased the attractiveness of water projects . the agency's regulatory responsibility for navigable waters extends to issuing permits for private actions that might affect wetlands and other waters of the united states . during the 1920s , congress expanded the corps' ability to incorporate hydropower into multi - purpose projects and authorized the agency to undertake comprehensive surveys to establish river - basin development plans . the flood control act of 1950 ( 33 u.s.c . 701n ) began the corps' emergency operations through authorization for flood preparedness and emergency operations . the water supply act of 1958 ( 43 u.s.c . the economic and environmental impact of corps projects and the agency's regulatory activities can be significant locally and regionally and at times are quite controversial . projects are largely planned at the district level and approved at the division and headquarters levels . the corps' oldest civil responsibilities are creating navigable channels and flood control projects . navigation projects include river deepening , channel widening , lock expansion , dam operations , and dredged material disposal . the corps generally requires two types of congressional authority to initiate a study — study authorization , then appropriations . a study authority allows the corps to investigate a problem and determine if there is a federal interest in proceeding further . 1531 ) required the corps to consider environmental impacts , increase public participation in planning , and consult with other federal agencies . executive orders ( eo 11988 and eo 11990 ) united the goals of reducing flood losses and environmental damage by recognizing the value of wetlands and required federal agencies to evaluate potential effects of actions on flood plains and to minimize impacts on wetlands . congress fundamentally transformed the ground rules for corps water project planning and funding through wrda 1986 ( 33 u.s.c . 2211 ) by establishing new cost - share formulas , resulting in greater financial and decision - making roles for local stakeholders . wrda 1986 reestablished the tradition of a biennial omnibus authorization bill . congress has since enacted wrdas in 1988 , 1990 , 1992 , 1996 , 1999 , and 2000 . wrda 1986 also provided the corps with authority to determine if changes can be made in existing structures or operations to improve environmental quality . wrda 1996 ( 33 u.s.c . projects generally originate from a community ( eg , citizens or businesses ) or local government entity requesting assistance with a water resource need that is beyond its capability to alleviate .