that deadline was not met . this effort resulted in the establishment of initial elements of the wassenaar arrangement , by 28 nations at the hague on december 19 , 1995 , subject to the approval of their governments . after meetings in early april and mid - july 1996 , the secretariat of the arrangement was established in vienna in 1996 . initially called the "new forum" , the wassenaar arrangement has as its primary focus two basic areas: ( 1 ) conventional weapons exports and , ( 2 ) sensitive dual - use items and technologies with military end uses . the clinton administration viewed the new accord as the "centerpiece" of its efforts to promote "multilateral restraint" in conventional arms sales and transfers of sensitive military technologies . the clinton conventional arms transfer policy , set out in february 1995 , was a restatement of a policy approach that has guided u.s. arms transfers since the reagan administration . the wassenaar arrangement ( formally titled the wassenaar arrangement on export controls for conventional arms and dual - use goods and technologies ) does not appear to break any new ground in the multilateral conventional arms control area . previous attempts to achieve regional conventional arms sales agreements—most notably the effort in 1991-1992 by the george h.w . bush administration aimed at securing restraint on middle east arms sales by the five permanent members of the u.n. security council—failed due to the lack of consensus among the parties regarding which weapons could be sold and to whom . elements of the wassenaar arrangement dealing with conventional weapons transfers depend for their success on securing the agreement of other weapons suppliers to forego activities that might otherwise be to their political or financial benefit . there are four major areas of policy concern within the wassenaar arrangement . these areas are membership , target countries , materials to be controlled , and organization / operational procedures . the agreed membership criteria of the wassenaar arrangement basically rely upon statements by members that they will abide by fairly general standards . since the russian export control system and those of other nis countries lack substantial transparency , what steps can be taken to ensure that the membership criteria will be complied with by these states and others with traditions of weak export control systems ? is there an effective means by which the united states can induce acceptance of higher standards for evaluating sensitive technology transfers by other participating states ? is legislation sanctioning nations that continue to transfer weapons and technology to aggressive nations in regions of tension such a mechanism ? would a greater emphasis on use of oversight mechanisms in u.s. law , such as the arms export control act , or the reauthorization of the export administration act provide the united states with a more effective means of achieving some of the fundamental goals it has been pursuing through the wassenaar arrangement ? the secretariat also decided whether to allow exceptions to agreed - upon restrictions . irregular cocom "high level" meetings set or enunciated overall policy for the members . to provide guidance , cocom created three lists of controlled items: an international industrial list , an international atomic energy list , and an international munitions list .