sec . 3 ( a ) states that "the united states will make available to taiwan such defense articles anddefense services in such quantity as may benecessary to enable taiwan to maintain a sufficient self - defense capability. sec . 3 ( b ) stipulates that both thepresident and the congress shall determine thenature and quantity of such defense articles and services based solely upon their judgment of the needs of taiwan . the tra set up the american institute intaiwan ( ait ) , a nonprofit corporation , to handle relations with taiwan . ait implements u.s. policy , with directionfrom the departments of defense and stateas well as the national security council ( nsc ) of the white house , and organizes the meetings on arms sales intaipei or washington . successiveadministrations used a process in determining arms sales to taiwan that became institutionalized as annual roundsof talks with taiwan authorities consisting ofseveral phases leading up to final meetings usually in april . in 1999 , u.s. - taiwan arms sales talks took place onapril 27-28 , in washington , and the clintonadministration confirmed that a taiwan military delegation was still in washington on april 29 , 1999 . on the positive side , the process used in determining arms sales to taiwan has evolved over the last two decades into a routine , rather than ad hoc , one wheretaiwan's evolving defense needs can be expected to be considered carefully every year by the united states at a highlevel . official taiwan media say that in thelast 20 years , taiwan's armed forces have procured "a lot of defensive weapons and equipment" from the unitedstates . ( 2 ) quoting a taiwan military source , ataiwan newspaper reports that the military there believes the pentagon , rather than the state department , is "quitesupportive" of taiwan's needs , and thesituation is thus "favorable. ( 3 ) this regular processallows for more predictable planning by taiwan authorities in charge of the defense budget and potentiallyreduces the chance that developments in u.s. relations with the prc could influence arms sales to taiwan . moreover , taiwan could send senior militarydelegations to washington . through the 1990s , the arms talks were low - profile , reducing the opportunities forgreater u.s. - prc friction . indicating securitybenefits of arms sales for taiwan , china objects to the tra and argues that washington is not observing the august17 , 1982 u.s. - prc communique ( onreducing arms sales to taiwan ) . ( 4 ) testifying beforethe senate foreign relations committee on august 4 , 1999 , deputy assistant secretary of defense kurtcampbell declared that the tra "has been the most successful piece of legislative leadership in foreign policy inrecent history. indeed , despite the unofficial nature of relations , u.s. arms sales to taiwan have been significant . from 1991 to 1998 , arms deliveries ( primarily u.s. ) to taiwantotaled $20 billion - - the second highest ( after arms transfers to saudi arabia ) . ( 5 ) contracts are signed under the foreign military sales ( fms ) program , withnotification to congress as required by the arms export control act .