law . a humanitarian aid program,mostly benefitting the vulnerable and elderly in kosovo , began in 1993 , and , in 1996 , usaid launched a food aidprogram targeted mainly toward refugees frombosnia and croatia and the poor , and implemented through u.s. private charitable organizations and the worldfood program . democratization efforts , however , continued to be stymied by the lack of a u.s. monitoring presence on the ground . in the mid - 1990s , some assistance wasnonetheless provided to albanian language newspapers and a civic education program was initiated in kosovo . but,following the lifting of bosnia - relatedsanctions at the end of 1996 , a usaid office was established in belgrade , and it initiated a small program to helpbuild democracy , encourage economic growth,and improve the quality of life ( health and education ) . projects were mostly conducted through u.s. and localnon - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , focusingon the grassroots and local government . democracy programs assisted the development of independent media,strengthened indigenous ngos , and advisedpolitical parties . economic growth - related projects were aimed at montenegro , which , with the rise to power ofan anti - milosevic government in 1997 , hadshown some progress in adopting economic reforms . among other activities , usaid helped the government ofmontenegro privatize its economy and providedbusiness services to entrepreneurs , including microcredit assistance . the 1999 war in kosovo significantly altered the u.s. assistance program in the federal republic of yugoslavia . in the aftermath of the war , the province ofkosovo - now occupied by an international military force and administered by the united nations - began to receivelarge - scale infusions of u.s. assistance . aidwent to such items as the un administrative budget , infrastructure repair , and law enforcement , in addition totraditional development activities . kosovo iscurrently treated as a separate entity by the u.s. assistance program . ( for discussion of u.s. and international aidprograms , see crs report rl30453 , kosovo:reconstruction and development assistance . ) montenegro , as a bone fide opponent of milosevic , also became the focus of greater attention , larger amounts of assistance , and separate treatment by the u.s. aidprogram . following the kosovo war , the united states provided $15 million in balance - of - payments support andtechnical assistance , aimed at helpingmontenegro survive the economic disruption and influx of kosovar refugees caused by the war , as well as serbianefforts to destabilize it . aid to serbia , restricted by congress to humanitarian and democracy assistance , was increased immediately after the war . in june 1999 , president clintonformally committed at least $10 million to democratization - $11.8 million was eventually used . in the months justbefore the fry elections , most of another $25million commitment was used . these funds helped support the opposition parties , by providing equipment suchas computers , training organizers , and fundingvoter surveys . assistance was also provided to independent media , labor unions , and opposition local governments,with a view toward strengthening opponentsto milosevic's rule . since the end of the milosevic regime , both the administration and congress have taken steps to assure serbia of u.s. support as it moves toward democracy andeconomic reform .