id . further , thestatute restricted speech on the basis of its content , as itrestricted political but not commercial solicitation , and therefore was not "a facially content - neutral time , place , ormanner restriction. id . the court therefore subjected the tennessee statute to strict scrutiny , which means that it required the state to show that the regulation serves a compelling stateinterest and "is necessary to serve the asserted interest. id . would there be a "compelling interest" in prohibiting media projections ? though there might be a compelling interest in preventing the media from interferingwith elections so as potentially to affect the outcome , it seems questionable whether election projections , if theyare understood by potential voters to be merelyprojections , could be said to interfere with elections . voters who hear or read such projections presumably knowthat they are only projections , and that their votescould still make a difference in the election . if they decide that that difference is not significant enough to makeit worth their while to vote , then they have made afree choice . the supreme court has written in another context: "the first amendment directs us to be especiallyskeptical of regulations that seek to keep peoplein the dark for what the government perceives to be their own good. 44 liquormart , inc. v. rhodeisland , 517 u.s. 484 , 503 ( 1996 ) . if there is concern that some potential voters might be misled by projections to think that the winner of an election has been determined , then congress might beable to require that disclosures accompany projections . although the first amendment protects the right not tospeak as well as the right to speak , the courtsmight view compelled disclosures in this case as serving a compelling interest in protecting the right to vote . in the seemingly unlikely event that a court were to find a compelling interest in prohibiting media election result projections , then the government would stillhave to show that there was no less restrictive means to further that interest . making this determination would entailconsideration of other proposals to deal withthe perceived problem . the purpose of legislation banning exit polling within a prescribed distance from the polls would be to make exit polling more difficult . in burson v. freeman ,504 u.s. 191 ( 1992 ) , the supreme court upheld a tennessee statute that prohibited the solicitation of votes and thedisplay or distribution of campaign materialswithin 100 feet of the entrance to a polling place . the court recognized that this statute both restricted politicalspeech , to which the first amendment "has itsfullest and most urgent application," and "bar[red] speech in quintessential public forums," the use of which forassembly and debate "has , from ancient times,been a part of the privileges , immunities , rights , and liberties of citizens. although applying strict scrutinyusually results in a statute's being struck down , in this casethe court concluded "that a state has a compelling interest in protecting voters from confusion and undueinfluence," and "in preserving the integrity of itselection process. id . or , more simply , in preventing "two evils: voter intimidation and election fraud. id .