during consideration of h.r . 9346 , the social security financing amendments of 1977 , the senate adopted by a voice vote an amendment by senator birch bayh that provided disability benefits for blind individuals regardless of their ability to work or the amount of money they actually earned . the amendment was identical to s. 753 , a bill introduced by senator hubert humphrey earlier in the year . speaking in support of this amendment on the senate floor , senator bayh stated , social security disability insurance was designed to partially replace income loss due to a disability . congress has previously recognized blindness as a distinct and unique condition . certain economic consequences predictably follow the disability of blindness . it is comparable with the social security insurance concept to protect the blind from these adverse effects . if persons with a high earning capacity can return to work at all after becoming blind , they do so , almost without exception , at a much lower salary , and continue to suffer an adverse impact on their earning power . moreover , working in a society adapted to vision entails extra costs for supportive services and special devices . the house - passed version of h.r . 9346 contained no similar provision . in conference , it was agreed that the house would recede with an amendment that struck the provisions of the senate amendment but provided that the amount of earnings under the test of sga that would terminate a blind individual's benefits would be increased to the monthly exempt amount for persons at or above the full retirement age ( fra ) under the social security earnings test . the conferees stated that they were aware that this established a different test of sga for blind persons than is applied administratively for persons with other disabilities . they went on to say that they did not intend that the new sga level established for the blind should be applied to other types of disabilities . when the provision became effective in 1978 , the sga for non - blind recipients was $260 a month ; for the blind , it was $334 a month , a difference of about 28% ( see figure a - 1 in the appendix ) . in subsequent years , the different sga amounts occasionally became subject to debate . in 1988 , the social security advisory council found that the preferential treatment for the blind was inappropriate and recommended that for new applicants the sga level be lowered to that for all other disabled recipients . the council also recommended that the sga level for blind persons already on the rolls be frozen at the then - current level ( $700 a month ) . in 1992 , the united states district court for the district of wyoming found that the higher sga amount for the blind was unconstitutional because it violated the guarantee of equal protection under the law . the united states court of appeals for the 10 th circuit overturned the district court's ruling , saying that there was a rational basis for congress to place preferences for blind persons in the law . the supreme court refused to review the appeals court's decision .