timing of the qdr . as discussed earlier , the qdr process was established as a title 10 requirement for the secretary of defense toconduct a qdr "every four years , during a year evenly divisible by four" and to submit the report to congress "notlater than september 30 of the year in which the review isconducted. ( 15 ) the national security strategy isdue in june of 2001 with the qdr report to follow by september 30 , 2001 . if the administration substantiallychanges previoussecurity strategy , dod will most likely require more time to formulate its strategy and concepts based on the newnational security strategy and delineate a coherent military strategywithin which to frame the qdr . it has been suggested by some that the administration take a different approachto the review . the bur was criticized on various grounds . some thought the resultant construct was merely a budget driven review and failed to adequately address the challenges of the newinternational security environment . as a result , in the 1994 national defense authorization act , congressmandated the commission on roles and missions ( corm ) . the corm waslater criticized for failing to depart from the two - mtw scenario . its most significant contributions includedsuggestions that dod undertake a major quadrennial strategy review and thatthe chairman of the joint chiefs of staff develop a clear vision for future joint operations . ( 4 ) reacting to one of the corm recommendations,congress directed the 1997 quadrennialdefense review as a method to conduct a "fundamental and comprehensive examination of america's defenseneeds. ( 5 ) the first qdr . qdr 97 described a strategy of "shape , respond , prepare" in which the military must shape the environment throughdeterrence and engagement , remain prepared to engage in a spectrum of conflicts ranging from small scalecontingencies to major theater war , and prepare for an uncertain future . inaddition , the report acknowledged the military must contend with additional threats including the proliferation ofweapons of mass destruction , advanced technologies , the drug trade,organized crime , uncontrolled immigration , and threats to the u.s. homeland . ( 6 ) as with the bur and corm , the qdr retained the two - mtw construct asits force shaping tool . as aresult , the1997 qdr was again criticized by many as a budget driven assessment of what military force structurewould be like if funded at present budget levels . the military force structure review act of 1996 established the independent national defense panel ( ndp ) as a forum to review the results of the 1997 qdr . the ndp report tookexception to what it termed broadly as the qdr's less than ambitious plan for defense transformation , stating that,"our current security arrangements - - will not be adequate to meetingthe challenges of the future. ( 7 ) it also recommendeda comprehensive look at scaling back or cancelling "legacy systems. ( 8 ) most significantly the ndp report challenged therequirement to fight two major theater wars simultaneously as simply a force sizing tool and not a viable strategy . the two - mtw construct was criticized as a means to justify cold warbased force structure and as a roadblock to implementing transformation strategies enabling the military to preparefor future threats .