the everglades is also harmed by degraded water quality . pollutants from urban areas and agricultural runoff , including excess nutrients ( such as phosphorous and nitrogen ) , metals , and pesticides , have harmed plant and animal populations . nutrients entering the everglades have caused a decline in native vegetation and an overabundance of invasive exotic species . others also have questioned the extent to which the impacts of sea level rise and climate change have been integrated into cerp , and their potential effects on the future of the everglades ecosystem . these groups contend that land acquisition is essential for successful everglades restoration . some environmental groups question the extent to which cerp contributes to everglades restoration and whether so complicated and costly a plan is necessary . there also is concern that the plan does not include enough measures to improve water quality in the everglades . some groups and federal agencies have noted that cerp does not explicitly give natural systems precedence in water allocation , and that it is focused first on water supply rather than on ecological restoration . no cerp projects have been completed since enactment , and all 15 cerp components scheduled for completion by 2007 have been delayed . there exists serious concern that delays may jeopardize the plan's feasibility . for example , delays in the modified waters deliveries project ( mod waters ) , a pre - cerp project to restore flows to everglades national park , may result in insufficient water flows for the implementation of cerp components on the eastern side of the everglades national park . this interdependency of cerp and non - cerp projects for achieving ecosystem restoration goals was codified in wrda 2000 , which restricted appropriations for specific components of cerp until mod waters is complete . habitat loss has threatened or endangered numerous plant and animal species . changes in the quantity , quality , and timing of freshwater flows have also disrupted the equilibrium of coastal estuaries and reef systems . the federal government and the state of florida have undertaken many restoration activities , such as acquiring lands and preparing a multi - species recovery plan , to address the health of the everglades . the south florida ecosystem restoration task force ( task force ) , which was formalized by wrda 1996 ( p.l . 104-303 ) , coordinates the numerous restoration activities . the task force facilitates restoration using the following goals: ( 1 ) "get the water right," ( 2 ) restore , preserve , and protect natural habitats and species , and ( 3 ) foster compatibility of built and natural systems . achieving these goals for south florida is estimated at nearly $20 billion , of which $10.9 billion would be spent under cerp . the plan is the principal mechanism for "getting the water right" ( i.e. , restoring natural hydrologic functions and water quality , and providing water supplies ) . cerp focuses on water quantity , quality , timing , and distribution . the plan is designed to capture and store freshwater , which is currently discharged to the ocean , for use during the dry season .