but by how much ? the pew survey also found that 7% of americans consider themselves to be lower class ; 25% , lower middle class ; 49% , middle class ; 15% , upper middle class ; and 2% , upper class . if the 15% of survey respondents who considered themselves upper middle class were added to the middle class rather than upper class category as pew has done , then the upper bound of the middle class might be somewhat over $200,000 . taken together , the survey responses suggest that the lower bound of the middle class might start in the middle ( third ) quintile of the income distribution shown in table 2 ( households with income of $39,736 to $64,553 ) . the surveys' results further suggest that the middle class extends into the top ( fifth ) quintile of the income distribution ( households with income of $104,087 or more ) — perhaps including households with income somewhat over $200,000 . the satisfaction ( utility ) that households derive from their income appears to be associated with both their absolute level of income and how that income level compares with the incomes of others . although members of the middle class may be content with absolute income levels that afford them a much - better - than - subsistence standard of living , their satisfaction also may be affected by their income relative to a reference group . if individuals care about how their income compares with that of their neighbors or coworkers , for example , it lends support to the notion of like income groups possessing a shared outlook on economic ( and perhaps other ) policy . since the 1990s , economists have increasingly turned their attention to identifying factors that contribute to utility ( well - being or happiness ) , including one's position relative to others . one study , for example , analyzed whether group - specific suicide rates are associated with interpersonal comparisons of income . mary daly and dan wilson used the suicide rate as an indicator of current and expected future happiness and developed three measures of relative income: the ratio of income at the 90 th percentile to median income ( 90 / 50 ) , the ratio of median income to income at the 10 th percentile ( 50 / 10 ) , and the ratio of income at the 90 th percentile to income at the 10 th percentile ( 90 / 10 ) . among their findings was that an increase in the 50 / 10 ratio was associated with a decrease in the suicide rate and that an increase in the 90 / 50 ratio was associated with an increase in the suicide rate . that is to say , those in the middle - income group ( the 50 th percentile ) were ( a ) happier the larger the gap was between them and those at the low end of the distribution and ( b ) unhappier the larger the gap was between them and those at the high end of the distribution . daly and wilson considered the results evidence that relative income influences a group's sense of well - being .