not all resources are counted for the purposes of determining ssi eligibility . first , the total amount permitted to be excluded is reduced by the face value of all life insurance policies held by the individual or his or her spouse . the face value of a policy is the amount the insurer agrees to pay the beneficiary upon the death of the insured . second , the excluded amount of burial expenses is reduced by the total amount of money held in an irrevocable trust ( commonly called an irrevocable burial trust ) available to meet the burial expenses of the individual or his or her spouse . a plan for achieving self - support ( pass ) is an individual plan for employment designed by an ssi beneficiary . an ssi beneficiary designs his or her own pass , usually with the assistance of a state vocational rehabilitation agency , disability service organization , or ticket to work employment network . the plan must be submitted in writing to the ssa and must be approved by a special network of ssa employees called the pass cadre . a pass must include a specific goal for employment , such as a specific job type desired or a plan for setting up a small business . in addition , a pass must include a timeline for achieving the employment goal . money from a dedicated account cannot be used for the daily expenses , food , clothing , or shelter of the child . the representative payee is responsible for keeping records and receipts of all deposits and expenditures and is liable to the ssa for any misuse of money in a dedicated account . the pass must also include a list of any goods , such as assistive devices or job - specific tools , or services , such as schooling , that will be needed by the beneficiary to achieve his or her goal and must include a timeline for the use of these goods or services and their cost . resources included in an approved pass are not counted against the ssi resource limits . there is no limit to the amount of resources that can be excluded as part of a pass and these resources can include money set aside to pay for elements of the pass such as training or items purchased as part of the pass such as assistive technology devices . if a beneficiary does not fulfill the terms of the pass , then these resources can be counted and he or she may lose ssi eligibility and be required to reimburse the ssa for benefits paid after eligibility was lost . in addition , under the provisions of the assets for independence act , p.l . 105-285 , nonprofit organizations , and state , local , or tribal governments may compete for grants to fund idas for low - income households . idas funded through this grant process are often referred to as demonstration project idas . money saved in a tanf ida or a demonstration project ida , including the state contribution and any interest earned , is not counted as a resource for the purposes of determining ssi eligibility .