enforcement . the secretary , covered entities , and others are required to ascertain compliance with , and enforcement of the privacy regulation . any person may file a complaint with the hhs office for civil rights . in cases of noncompliance , the secretary is directed to resolve the matter by informal means . if the matter cannot be resolved informally , the secretary may issue written findings of non - compliance that may be used as a basis for initiating action ( civil monetary penalties ) or a criminal referral . penalties . violators will be subject to civil monetary penalties ( $100 per violation up to $25,000 per year ) , and criminal penalties ( up to $250,000 and imprisonment up to 10 years ) against covered entities that knowingly and improperly disclose identifiable health information . the regulation does not authorize patients to sue . instead , the law provides that individuals must direct their complaints to hhs' office for civil rights ( ocr ) . ocr maintains a web site with information on the new regulation , including guidance at http: / / www.hhs.gov / ocr / hipaa / . hhs also recently issued a 20 page "summary of the hipaa privacy rule. hhs will enforce the civil money penalties , and the department of justice will enforce the criminal penalties . the final privacy rule was criticized by some for its complexity , and for the imposition of substantial administrative and financial burdens on the health care industry . at the same time , the regulation was applauded by privacy advocates , consumer groups , and some health care industry participants . the general accounting office found that considerable uncertainty existed regarding the actions needed to comply with the new privacy regulations . several areas were targeted for clarification or modification: impediments to information sharing ; consent and authorization procedures ; parental access to minors' health information ; uses and disclosures for treatment , payment , and health care operations ; notices of privacy practices ; minimum necessary uses and disclosures ; oral communications ; business associates ; uses and disclosures for marketing ; parents as the personal representatives of unemancipated minors ; uses and disclosures for research purposes ; uses and disclosures for which authorizations are required ; and de - identification . on july 6 , 2001 hhs issued interpretative guidance materials on the rule . in response to numerous and extensive comments received by hhs , along with intense lobbying efforts by various stakeholders , in march 2002 the bush administration issued proposed modifications to the privacy rule in the federal register at 67 fed . reg . 14775 , and permitted a 30-day comment period on its proposal . on august 14 , 2002 , hhs published in the federal register the privacy rule with certain modifications , 67 fed . reg . the august 2002 modification is virtually unchanged from the march 2002 proposal , does not require congressional approval , and has the force of law . a summary of significant final modifications follows . for detailed discussion of medical privacy issues , see crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questions and answers on the hipaa rule . notice .