section 512 of p.l . 110-81 , the honest leadership and open government act , directs the majority and minority leaders of the senate to recognize an anonymous hold only when public notice procedures outlined in that section are followed by senators . at the beginning of the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) , the senate adopted a standing order that was designed to supplement this law . senate rules provide that executive business ( i.e. , treaties and nominations ) be considered in executive session rather than in legislative session like other business of the senate . under rule xxv , all treaties are referred to the foreign relations committee and , when they are reported , are placed on the executive calendar . treaties must lie over for one calendar day before any subsequent senate consideration . similarly , under rule xxxi , nominations must be referred to the appropriate committee and cannot be voted on the same day they are received from the president or on the same day they are reported , except by unanimous consent . the majority leader will typically seek to obtain unanimous consent to go into executive session to consider specific executive business . however , a majority leader may alternatively make a motion to go into executive session that may specify a particular treaty or nomination to be considered . the motion to go into executive session is neither debatable nor amendable and is highly privileged . it takes precedence over all motions except to adjourn or recess and is not subject to a motion to table . if the motion provides that the senate go into executive session to consider a specific piece of executive business , the effect is to raise executive business for consideration by non - debatable motion . although infrequent in current practice , the senate may also agree to a request or motion to go into executive session without an item of executive business being specified . in that case , once the senate is in executive session , it may proceed to specific executive business by unanimous consent or by motion , but the motion would be debatable . on november 21 , 2013 , and april 6 , 2017 , the senate voted to establish new precedents related to the number of votes necessary to bring debate to a close on presidential nominations . under these precedents , invoking cloture on presidential nominations requires a vote of a majority of senators present and voting ( 51 votes if all 100 senators vote ) . prior to the establishment of these two precedents , the cloture threshold for nominations was three - fifths of the senators duly chosen and sworn , or 60 votes if there are no vacancies in the senate's membership . multiple nominations are frequently considered together ( "en bloc" ) but only by unanimous consent . upon objection by any senator a nomination must be considered separately . conference reports do not come up for consideration from the calendar . instead they may be called up at any time when the conference papers are filed at the "desk" in the senate . senate rules provide a senator placing a hold with at least two possible ways of enforcing it .