its meetings are not public . csac itself employs no staff . to expedite its work , employees of the usps's stamp development group analyze all stamp subject suggestions upon initial receipt . subcommittees of staff researchers are formed on special themes such as sports , medicine , transportation , black heritage , and performing arts to provide additional background and research . occasionally , commemorative ideas require considerable research to explore an idea's merit or to devise a strong visual appeal . all supporting materials are then presented to the committee , along with any suggestions . while the primary responsibility of the committee is to review and appraise all proposals submitted for commemoration , the pmg has the exclusive and final authority to determine both the subject matter and the designs for u.s. postage stamps . thus , for example , although the advisory committee recommended in 2003 that a stamp be commissioned for tercentenary of the birth of 18 th century theologian jonathan edwards , pmg john potter refused to approve the recommendation . members of congress are often asked by constituents to support a particular commemorative theme or event . in doing so , a member may choose to write the pmg expressing support for a particular stamp proposal . this usually results in a referral to the advisory committee . it is not uncommon for members to introduce congressional resolutions encouraging the commemoration of a specific subject . in the 108 th congress , 28 resolutions for this purpose were introduced ; in the 109 th congress , 23 resolutions were introduced . however , congressional endorsement of a proposal accords it no special status in the committee's deliberations . the house committee on oversight and government reform has discouraged members from introducing bills endorsing the issuance of new commemorative stamps . for the 110 th congress , the committee's rule 20 reads: the committee has adopted the policy that the determination of the subject matter of commemorative stamps ... is properly for consideration by the postmaster general and that the committee will not give consideration to legislative proposals for the issuance of commemorative stamps and new semi - postal issues . it is suggested that recommendations for the issuance of commemorative stamps be submitted to the postmaster general . thus , in the house , when a commemorative stamp bill is introduced , it is referred the committee , which takes no further action on the bill . as a basis for its recommendation to the postmaster general , the advisory committee uses 12 criteria when considering commemorative stamp subjects . they are: it is a general policy that u.s. postage stamps and stationery primarily will feature american or american - related subjects . no living person shall be honored by portrayal on u.s. postage . commemorative stamps or postal stationery items honoring individuals usually will be issued on , or in conjunction with significant anniversaries of their birth , but no postal item will be issued sooner than five years after an individual's death . events of historical significance shall be considered for commemoration only on anniversaries in multiples of 50 years . only events and themes of widespread national appeal and significance will be considered for commemoration .