1495 ) and on fy2008 appropriations for the bureau and the corps . specific issues that are being or may be discussed during the 110 th congress are treated below . other general issues also being discussed include federal reserved water rights in relation to federal lands , transfer of water across federal lands and through federal facilities , indian water rights settlements , licensing of nonfederal hydropower facilities ( i.e. , private dams regulated by the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) ) , and whether to establish a national water commission to address federal water policy and coordination . most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the united states were built by , or with the assistance of , the bureau of reclamation in the department of the interior ( bureau ) or the u.s. army corps of engineers in the department of defense ( corps ) . traditionally , bureau projects were designed principally to provide reliable supplies of water for irrigation and some municipal and industrial uses ; corps projects were designed principally for flood control , navigation , and power generation . the bureau currently manages hundreds of storage reservoirs and diversion dams in 17 western states , providing water to approximately 9 million acres of farmland and 31 million people . the corps' operations are much more widespread and diverse , and include several thousand flood control and navigation projects throughout the country , including 25,000 miles of waterways ( with 238 navigation locks ) , nearly 1,000 harbors , and 400 dam and reservoir projects ( with 75 hydroelectric plants ) . also of concern nationwide is the status of threatened and endangered species and the health of the nation's rivers and riparian areas . federal obligations to protect threatened and endangered species and other environmental quality requirements have resulted in increased attention to river and watershed restoration efforts . the federal government is involved in several significant restoration initiatives ranging from the florida everglades to the california bay - delta ( calfed ) . at the same time , the demand for traditional or new water supply projects , navigational improvements , flood control projects , and beach and shoreline protection continues . in fact , both the everglades and bay - delta restoration efforts include significant water supply components . controversy over how much water should be divided among recovering ( threatened and endangered ) species , protecting water quality , and supplying farms , cities , and other uses has been ongoing . further , widespread drought throughout different parts of the country over the past several years has spurred new requests for developing and ensuring dwindling water supplies , and new security threats to water infrastructure have placed added pressures on budgetary resources . the 109 th congress left pending several national water policy proposals , ranging from new water study commissions and assessments to global sanitation and drinking water aid , some of which have been reintroduced in the 110 th congress . the 110 th congress also has addressed water resource issues during consideration of individual project authorizations , as well as during debate on wrda legislation ( h.r .