for example , h.r . 1646 , the helping emergency responders overcome act of 2019 ( the hero act ) , introduced by representative bera on march 8 , 2019 , would direct usfa , in coordination with the secretary of health and human services , to develop and make publicly available resources that may be used by the federal government and other entities to educate mental health professionals about the mental health issues and challenges faced by firefighters and emergency medical services personnel . finally , an ongoing issue is the viability and status of the usfa and national fire academy within the department of homeland security . while supportive of the reorganization of fema into dhs , many in the fire service community have cautioned that usfa and nfa programs — which address the day - to - day challenges faced by fire departments — should not be overshadowed in an organization which focuses on homeland security and counterterrorism . since the establishment of dhs in march 2003 , fire service groups have opposed a number of actions dhs has taken with respect to the usfa and nfa . the commission recommended that this new agency be placed within the department of housing and urban development . congress instead opted to place the agency in the department of commerce , and with the passage of the federal fire prevention and control act of 1974 ( p.l . 93-498 ) , the national fire prevention and control administration ( nfpca ) was established . in 1978 , congress changed the name of nfpca to usfa ( p.l . 95-422 ) , and in 1979 , president carter's reorganization plan no . 3 placed the usfa within the newly created fema . also in 1979 , the national fire academy ( nfa ) in emmitsburg , md , was opened , offering courses and training to fire service personnel and other persons engaged in fire prevention and control . during the early 1980s , the reagan administration proposed the elimination of the usfa ( while preserving the fire academy ) . although congress did not allow the termination of the usfa , the agency suffered severe staff reductions and the fire academy was separated from the usfa and housed organizationally with other fema emergency training programs . in 1991 , the nfa was subsequently reorganized back into the usfa , where it remains today . currently , the usfa is located on the grounds of the national emergency training center in emmitsburg , md . usfa programs include the following: data collection — usfa's national fire data center ( nfdc ) administers a national system ( the national fire incident reporting system or nfirs ) used for collecting , analyzing , and disseminating data and information on fire and other emergency incidents to state and local governments and the fire community . the nfdc provides a national analysis of the fire problem , identifying problem areas for which prevention and mitigation strategies are needed . public education and awareness — through partnerships and special initiatives , usfa involves the fire service , the media , other federal agencies , and safety interest groups in the development and delivery of fire safety awareness and education programs .