section 1552 . the salary and allowance provisions are codified at 3 u.s.c . section 102 . upon leaving office , the president receives a pension that is equal to the salary for level i of the executive schedule ( $199,700 , salary frozen at january 2010 rate ) . at this rate , the pension is currently $300 short of being one - half of the president's current salary . the appropriation for the compensation of the president is an account under the executive office of the president and is included in an annual appropriations act , which , in the 112 th congress , is known as the financial services and general government appropriations act . the compensation provision in the constitution of the united states has been interpreted to apply to a president's current term of office . according to the general principles of constitutional law in the united states of america , "an increase made after a president has been re - elected , but before the second term has begun , may apply to his salary during the second term. the compensation of the president is exempt from sequestration to reduce budgetary resources . the president's salary was established in 1789 and has been adjusted five times since — in 1873 , 1909 , 1949 , 1969 , and 1999 — as shown in table 1 , below . a brief discussion of the congressional action that resulted in the three most recent increases to the president's salary follows . any legislation to increase the salary of the 44 th president ( barack h. obama ) during his current term would have to have been enacted prior to january 20 , 2009 , at noon , when the president was sworn in . no legislation proposing such an increase was introduced in the 110 th congress . no legislation to increase the salary of the president who will assume office on january 20 , 2013 , was introduced in the 111 th congress or has been introduced in the 112 th congress . any unused amount of the allowance reverts back to the u.s. treasury pursuant to 31 u.s.c . the compensation is set and adjusted by congress . the president's salary is currently set at $400,000 and is subject to income tax . an allowance , at present $50,000 , is not taxable and is to be used "to assist in defraying expenses relating to or resulting from the discharge of his official duties. article ii , section 1 of the constitution of the united states provides that "the president shall , at stated times , receive for his services , a compensation , which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected , and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the united states , or any of them.