( see table 2 . ) in only three years was the increase in the cpi - e closer to that of the cpi - w than the cpi - u . the increase in the cpi - e has usually been closer to that of the cpi - u partly because a larger weight is given to health care outlays in the market basket of the cpi - u than the cpi - w. ( recall that unlike the cpi - w , the cpi - u covers persons not in the labor force including retirees. ) the difference in the annual rates of change of the cpi - e compared with both the cpi - w and cpi - u has generally decreased since 1993 , largely because the gap between health care inflation and overall inflation has narrowed as has the gap between shelter inflation and overall inflation . the 0.5-0.7 percentage point gap in the annual rates of change between the cpi - e compared with the cpi - w and cpi - u that often was the case from 1982 to 1993 , shrank to 0.3 percentage points or less in most years thereafter . ( see table 2 . ) although the differences in the three indexes usually have been in the expected direction , the relationships between the three might not be the same if bls developed an official rather than experimental index for the elderly . optimally , when constructing a cpi for older americans , a sample of geographic areas would be drawn for that specific population . in addition , surveys would be designed to collect expenditure weights for that specific population , a point - of - purchase survey designed for that population would be used to construct the outlet frame , and the distribution of items sampled would be representative of older americans . such an index would be costly to construct , however , and congress has not appropriated the necessary funds to do so . for example , the number of households in the ces on which market baskets are based is much smaller for the cpi - e than for the cpi - w and cpi - u . the cpi - e therefore is subject to greater sampling error than the official indexes because of bls' limited resources . the cpi - e also uses the cpi - u's sample of retail outlets to gather prices , but the outlets may not accurately reflect those at which the elderly shop and the prices may not be representative of those paid by the elderly . these methodological limitations may have contributed to the differences in the experimental compared with official measures of inflation and are the reasons for it being "classified as an experimental index. if the primary purpose of developing a separate index for the elderly is to inflation - adjust social security benefits , it should be kept in mind that not all social security recipients are elderly . some receive benefits under the program because they have disabilities ; others , because they are the spouse or young child of a deceased worker covered by the program .