tps is a blanket form of humanitarian relief . it is the statutory embodiment of safe haven for foreign nationals within the united states who may not meet the legal definition of refugee or asylee but are nonetheless fleeing — or reluctant to return to — potentially dangerous situations . there are statutory limitations on congress providing adjustment of status to tps recipients . over the years , congress has provided eligibility for lpr status to groups of nationals who had been given temporary relief from removal . in addition , table 1 shows the approximate number of individuals from each country who registered during the previous registration period and the number of individuals with tps as of november 29 , 2018 . individuals with tps reside in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories . 105-100 ) , which became law in 1997 , provided eligibility for lpr status to certain nicaraguans , cubans , guatemalans , salvadorans , and nationals of the former soviet bloc who had applied for asylum and had been living in the united states for a certain period of time . the 105 th congress passed the haitian refugee immigration fairness act , enabling haitians who had filed asylum claims or who were paroled into the united states before december 31 , 1995 , to adjust to legal permanent residence ( p.l . legislation that would have allowed nationals from various countries that have had tps to adjust to lpr status received action in past congresses , but was not enacted . for instance , the senate - passed comprehensive immigration reform bill in the 113 th congress ( s. 744 ) did not include specific provisions for foreign nationals with tps to adjust status , but many would have qualified for the registered provisional immigrant status that s. 744 would have established . various proposals related to tps have been introduced in the 115 th and 116 th congresses . some bills would extend or expand tps designations for certain countries ( eg , venezuela ) , prohibit federal funds from being used to implement recent tps terminations , or provide adjustment to lpr status for tps recipients who have been living in the united states for several years . other bills variously seek to limit the program by transferring authority from dhs to congress to designate foreign states ; making unauthorized aliens and members of criminal gangs ineligible ; restricting the criteria for designating a foreign state ; making tps recipients subject to detention and expedited removal ; or phasing out the program . the highest populations live in traditional immigrant gateway states: california , florida , texas , and new york . in addition to these four , six other states had at least 10,000 tps recipients as of november 2018: virginia , maryland , new jersey , massachusetts , north carolina , and georgia . hawaii , wyoming , vermont , and montana had fewer than 100 individuals with tps . see figure 1 and table a - 1 .