appendix a . acronym . a report by the u.s . departments of transportation , education , and labor titled "strengthening skills training and career pathways across the transportation industry" identified high - paying , high - skilled , high - demand transportation jobs . as global trade and gvcs grow , these shortages could become more acute . pairing a taaf - qualified firm with mncs or companies focused on supply chain may provide opportunities for eda to help firms through taaf meet growing demand . a second fundamental shift in global trade that is opening new markets for smes is occurring with the internet - driven digital revolution . digital platforms , including online communication tools and e - commerce websites , can minimize costs and enable smes to grow through extended reach to new customers and markets or by integrating into a gvc . as a result , many such firms that in the past might not export or seek new markets abroad are more easily able and willing to conduct business in global markets . in addition , increased digitization of customs and border control mechanisms helps simplify and speed delivery of imported goods to customers , making them more attractive to foreign buyers . as a result , digitization can enable smes to serve the new markets abroad that are opened by trade liberalization . for example , a study of u.s. smes on the e - commerce platform ebay found that 97% export ; among the 50 states , the range was from 93 to 98% . according to ebay , 59% of its u.s. smes export to 10 or more markets . in countries as diverse as peru and the ukraine , a full 100% of ebay smes export . taaf programs provide one channel for helping trade - impacted smes make the necessary shifts and gain the skills to succeed in online marketplaces and keep up with technological changes . as congress considers trade liberalization agreements and ongoing trade negotiations , it may wish to further examine the taaf in light of the current debate of its effectiveness and the impact of international trade on the u.s. economy . an implementing bill for a new trade agreement , such as a renegotiated nafta , may provide congress an opportunity to reexamine and potentially revise the taa programs . in addition to adjusting appropriations levels , congress could examine changing the current program or eda's administration of it . potential options for congress to consider on taaf may include determining if current funding levels are appropriate ; further refining the performance metrics to measure the employment or economic impact of taaf programs ; placing a stronger emphasis on assisting smes utilize technology to improve operational efficiency , expand into new markets , including through e - commerce , and take fuller advantage of an increasingly digitally - driven economy ; facilitating partnerships with large multinational companies to support sme integration into gvcs ; or consolidating or streamlining taaf with other federal programs that assist troubled smes such as those operated by the small business administration ( sba ) .