these amendments were not enacted . 4141 , 106th cong . one amendment , offered by representative norwood , concerned the disciplineof a child with a disability who carries or possesses a weapon . a revised stay put provision remains in idea . issues relating to children with disabilities who exhibit violent or inappropriate behavior have been raised for years and in 1988 the question of whether there wasan implied exception to the stay put provision was presented to the supreme court in honig v. doe . ( 4 ) although the supreme court did not find such animpliedexception , it did find that a ten day suspension was allowable and that schools could seek judicial relief when theparents of a truly dangerous child refuse topermit a change in placement . in brief , if a childwith a disability commits an action that would besubject to discipline , school personnel have the following options: suspending the child for up to ten days with no educational services provided , conducting a manifestation determination review to determine whether there is a link between the child's disability and the misbehavior . ifthe child's behavior is not a manifestation of a disability , long term disciplinary action such as expulsion may occur,except that educational services may notcease . if the child's behavior is a manifestation of the child's disability , the school may review the child's placementand , if appropriate , initiate a change inplacement . placing the child in an interim alternative education setting for up to forty five days ( which can be renewed ) for situations involving weaponsor drugs , and asking a hearing officer to order a child be placed in an interim alternative educational setting for up to forty - five days ( which can berenewed ) if it is demonstrated that the child is substantially likely to injure himself or others in his currentplacement . school officials may also seek a honig injunction as discussed previously if they are unable to reach agreement with a student's parents and they feel that the newstatutory provisions are not sufficient . violence in schools surfaced on the congressional agenda in the 106th congress with s. 254 , the violent and repeat juvenile accountability andrehabilitation act of 1999 which passed the senate on may 20 , 1999 , and h.r . 1501 , the child safety andprotection act which passed the house onjune 17 , 1999 . both of these bills contained amendments offered on the floor relating to discipline under idea . essentially these amendments would havechanged section 615 of idea to eliminate idea's different disciplinary procedures for children with disabilitiesin certain situations . in the senate theamendment applied to children with disabilities who carry or possess a gun or firearm while in the house theamendment would have covered a weapon . thesenate passed amendment 355 , offered by senators frist and ashcroft , by a vote of 74 to 25 . ( 7 ) the house passed amendment 35 , offered byrepresentativenorwood , by a vote of 300 to 128 . ( 8 ) the legislationwas not enacted . these house and senate amendments were the subject of emotional debate .