the rest they subscribe as callable capital . callable capital is a contingent liability , payable only if an mdb becomes bankrupt and lacks sufficient funds to repay its own creditors . it cannot be called to provide the banks with additional loan funds . countries' voting shares are determined mainly by the size of their contributions . the united states is the largest stockholder in most mdbs , and has maintained this position to preserve veto power in some institutions over major policy decisions . figure 1 , figure 2 , and tables 1-4 show the amounts the administration has requested and congress has appropriated annually since fy2000 to the multilateral development banks . note that the figures and tables do not include callable capital . the main differences between them are the repayment terms and the countries which qualify for them . the mdbs also have specialized facilities which have their own operating staff and management but report to the bank's president and executive board . the world bank's international finance corporation ( ifc ) and the idb's inter - american investment corporation ( iic ) make loans to or equity investments in private - sector firms in developing countries ( on commercial terms ) without government repayment guarantees . the asdb makes similar loans from its market - rate loan account . the world bank's multilateral investment guarantee agency ( miga ) underwrites private investments in developing countries ( on commercial terms ) to protect against noneconomic risk . at the idb , the multilateral investment fund ( mif ) helps latin american countries institute policy reforms aimed at stimulating domestic and international investment . it also funds worker retraining and programs for small and micro - enterprises . the mif originated as part of president bush's 1990 enterprise for the americas initiative ( eai ) . the nadbank was created by the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) to fund environmental infrastructure projects in the u.s. - mexico border region . the international fund for agricultural development ( ifad ) , created in 1977 , focuses on reducing poverty and hunger in poor countries through agricultural development . finally , the world bank also serves as the trustee for several targeted multilateral development funds , for which the administration has requested and congress has appropriated funds . these multilateral funds include the clean technology fund ( ctf ) , the strategic climate fund ( scf ) , the global environment facility ( gef ) , and the global agriculture and food security program ( gafsp ) . their loans are made to governments or to organizations having government repayment guarantees . periodically , as the stock of uncommitted mdb funds begins to run low , the major donors negotiate a new funding plan that specifies their new contribution shares . loans from the mdbs' market - rate loan facilities are funded with money borrowed in world capital markets . the ifc and iic fund their loans and equity investments partly with money contributed by their members and partly with funds borrowed from commercial capital markets . each has a president and executive board that manages or supervises all of its programs and operations .