it is still pending before that body . on december 17 , 1999 , the united states and the european union signed a "statement of common principles on small arms and light weapons. this statement contains a pledge by the parties to observe restraint in their export policies and to harmonize these policies and procedures governing small arms . this statement also included a commitment to plan together for a united nations small arms conference aimed at "achieving tangible results...including an action plan for the international community to deal with the problem. the united states has also provided resources to assist other nations destroy their excess weapons stocks . the state department cites u.s. assistance , through contributing experts and funds , in the destruction of small arms and light weapons and ammunition in liberia , kuwait , haiti , panama , mali , albania , and the former yugoslavia . the united states has also facilitated an agreement among 10 nations in southeastern europe to seize and destroy illicit and surplus arms in that region . the united states continues to participate in international fora aimed at addressing various issues associated with the international small arms and light weapons trade . it actively pursued its principal policy goals at the united nations conference on the "illicit trade of small arms and light weapons in all its aspects," held july 9-20 , 2001 at united nations headquarters in new york city . the program of action agreed to at this conference is non - binding on any state . it encourages nations to ensure that manufacturers use markings on small arms and light weapons to facilitate the tracing of illicit weapons transfers . it also encourages nations to establish procedures to monitor legal sales , transfer and stockpiling of small arms and light weapons , and urges governments to make the illegal manufacture , trade and possession of such weapons a criminal offense . the u.n. conference further agreed to hold a follow - up conference to review measures undertaken to achieve the above goals . on june 26 , 2006 , the united nations began a conference aimed at reviewing the progress made in implementation of the previously agreed program of action to prevent , combat , and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons . this conference met through july 7 , 2006 . the conference was unable to agree on an outcome document . the united states representative to the conference stated on july 7 , 2006 , that the united states would continue to provide assistance to those nations seeking to implement the program originally agreed upon in 2001 . he noted that it was the intent of the united states to continue its efforts in the areas of transport controls , export controls , and marking and tracing . it further "intended to expand its efforts in africa and eastern europe. other conference participants expressed similar commitments in support of the 2001 program of action . this convention has not been ratified by many of its key signatories . it was submitted to the u.s. senate in april 1998 . u.s. diplomacy has been directed to achieving that outcome .