during the bush administration . throughout the first eight months of 2001 , the bush administration hadhinted that the united states would like to remove the sanctions imposed against india and , to a lesser extent,pakistan . ( 7 ) india's foreign and defense ministervisited washington in april ; chairman of the joint chiefs of state , general shelton visited india in may to discussmilitary - to - military relations . in may , 2001,and again in august , deputy secretary of state richard armitage visited india and publically stated the unitedstates' interests in fully normalizing relationswith the country . in august 2001 , u.s. trade representative robert zoellick visited india to promote global tradetalks . regarding pakistan , secretary of state powell met with its foreign minister in washington in june . they reportedly discussed afghanistan and the taliban,terrorism , democracy , nuclear proliferation , and sanctions . ( 8 ) after the terrorist attack on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , because of pakistan's unique position - both geographic and political - vis - a - visafghanistan , policymakers recognized the urgency by which u.s. - pakistan relations had to be mended . at the sametime , parity had to be maintained in termsof india . as a result , the president exercised the authority granted him in the defense appropriations act , fy2000,on september 22 , 2001 , when he lifted allnuclear test - related economic sanctions against the two countries after finding that denying export licenses andassistance was not in the national securityinterests of the united states . ( 9 ) today , the solevestige of the nuclear sanctions is the listing of four indian and 20 pakistani entities ( and their subsidiaries ) onthe commerce department's list of entities for which export licenses are required . during the clinton administration . almost immediately after the 1998 imposition of sanctions on india andpakistan required in the arms export control act , congress intervened on behalf of u.s. wheat growers by passingthe agriculture export relief act , signedinto law on july 14 , 1998 . ( 4 ) the act amended theaeca to exempt various department of agriculture - backed funding from sanctions applied pursuant tosection 102 of that act . this freed up u.s. wheat farmers to participate in auctions in which pakistan was asubstantial buyer . congress later passed theindia - pakistan relief act of 1998 , signed into law by the president on october 21 , 1998 . ( 5 ) this act authorized the president to waive , for a period of one year,the application of sanctions relating to u.s. foreign assistance , u.s. government nonmilitary transactions , the u.s.position on loans or assistance byinternational financial institutions , and u.s. commercial bank transactions . president clinton quickly made use ofhis new authority , announcing on november7 , 1998 , that certain transactions and support would be restored . the authority granted to the president in each of these 1998 laws , however , was limited to a one - year period . additional legislation was required to make theauthority permanent . congress provided permanent waiver authority in the department of defense appropriationsact , fy2000 , signed into law on october25 , 1999 .