1030 ( c ) . the attempt , conspiracy , and complicity observations continue to apply and the rico ( 18 u.s.c . 1962 ) and money laundering ( 18 u.s.c . 1956 , 1957 ) may be implicated through the application of sections 793 , 794 , or 798 to conduct that offends paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 1 ) . the five include computers ( 1 ) used exclusively for or by the united states government ; ( 2 ) used exclusively for or by a bank or other financial institution ; ( 3 ) used in part for or by the united states government where the damage "affects" government use or use on the government's behalf ; ( 4 ) used in part for or by a bank or other financial institution where the damage "affects" use by or on behalf of the institution ; and ( 5 ) used in , or affecting , interstate or foreign commerce or communications . penalties : recidivism and causing serious damage recklessly or intentionally are punished more severely than first offenses or causing damage without necessarily intending to do so or than causing less serious damage intentionally or recklessly . first - time offenders who do not cause serious damage are punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year . when an offender with a prior conviction causes damage that is not serious , he is punishable by imprisonment for more than 10 years . offenders with a prior conviction who intentionally or recklessly cause damage that is not serious are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years . on the other hand , intentionally causing serious damage through a knowing transmission to a protected computer is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years ( not more than 20 years for a second or subsequent offense ) . recklessly causing serious damage following unauthorized access or attempted access carries a penalty of imprisonment for not more than five years ( not more than 20 years for a second or subsequent offense ) . an offender who knowingly or recklessly causes or attempts to cause serious bodily injury or death by knowingly causing an intentionally damaging transmission to a protected computer is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years ( any term of years or life if death results ) . other than physical injury or death , the types of serious damage that trigger more severe punishment are damage that ( 1 ) causes a loss that over the course a year exceeds $5,000 ; ( 2 ) modifies , impairs , or could modify or impair medical services ; ( 3 ) causes physical injury ; ( 4 ) threatens public health or safety ; ( 5 ) affects a justice , national defense , or national security entity computer ; or ( 6 ) affects 10 or more protected computers over the course of a year . other crimes : the general observations concerning attempt , conspiracy and complicity noted for the simple trespass paragraph apply here .