they are not expected to be completed in the near future . as lawmakers consider policy options , other countries will be evaluating not only whether , in their view , these options will comply with the u.s. commitments under the aoa , but also how they reflect on the u.s. negotiating position in the doha round of talks . the u.s. objective is for negotiations to result in substantial reductions in trade - distorting support and stronger rules that ensure that all production - related support is subject to discipline , while preserving criteria - based "green box" policies that can support agriculture in ways that minimize trade distortions . at the same time , congress might seek domestic farm policy measures that it can justify as aoa - and scm - compliant . the last u.s. notification to the wto was made on december 8 , 2014 , for the 2012 marketing year and the farm programs of the 2008 farm bill . following are examples of how various u.s. domestic policies were classified in that notification , along with the associated values . can the measure be classified as a "green box" policy — one presumed to have the least potential for distorting production and trade and therefore not counted as part of the ams ? can it be classified as a "blue box" policy — that is , a production - limiting program that receives a special exemption and therefore is also not counted as part of the ams ? if it is a potentially trade - distorting "amber box" policy , can support still be excluded from the ams calculation under the so - called 5% de minimis exemption ( explained later in more detail ) because total support is no more than 5% of either: a. the value of total annual production if the support is non - product specific , or b. the value of annual production of a particular commodity if the support is specific to that commodity ? if such support exceeds the de minimis 5% threshold ( and thus cannot be exempted ) , when it is added to all other forms of non - exempt amber box support is total u.s. ams still beneath the $19.1 billion limit ? if a program is fully compliant with the aoa rules and limits , does its support result in price or trade distortion in international markets that , in turn , cause adverse effects upon another wto member ? if so , then it may be subject to challenge under scm rules . the aoa's structure of varying spending limits across the amber , blue , and green boxes is intentional . by leaving no constraint on spending in the green box while imposing limits on ams spending , the wto implicitly encourages countries to design their domestic farm support programs to be green - box - compliant . negotiations to further reform agricultural trade within the context of the wto — referred to as the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations — began in 2001 . green box policies ( $127.5 billion ) the united states notified $127.5 billion in green box outlays , including outlays under the following programs ( figure 4 ) .