the revenues are deposited in the u.s. treasury . social security benefits and administrative expenses are also paid from the u.s. treasury . by law , if social security revenues exceed expenditures , the "surplus" is credited to the social security trust funds in the form of u.s. government securities . the money itself , however , is used to pay for whatever other expenses the government may have at the time . there is no separate pool of money set aside for social security purposes . , public issues ) would be in the public interest only when it might serve to stabilize the market for treasury issues . it also has been regarded as a way to avoid the political influences that would be inherent in investing outside the u.s. government . generally , the goal espoused has been to place the trust funds in the same position as any long - term investor seeking a safe rate of return by investing in u.s. securities , and neither advantage nor disadvantage the trust funds relative to these investors or other parts of the government . because an "unstable market" would be characterized by falling bond prices , purchases of marketable federal securities at these times would appear to be advantageous for the trust funds . that is not to say that the trust funds are ephemeral — as long as the trust funds show a positive balance , they represent the authority and an obligation for the u.s. treasury to issue benefit payments during periods when the program's expenditures exceed revenues . at the end of calendar year 2013 , the trust funds were credited with holdings of $2.8 trillion . section 201 of the social security act provides the following guidelines for trust fund investment . funds not immediately in demand for benefits or administrative expenses are to be invested in interest - bearing obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the united states . obligations are to be purchased at issue at the issue price or at the market price for outstanding obligations . the managing trustee of the social security trust funds ( the secretary of the treasury ) is required to invest in special "nonmarketable" federal public - debt obligations — special issues to the trust funds that are not available to the general public — except where he or she determines that the purchase of marketable federal securities is "in the public interest. special issues shall have maturities fixed with due regard for the needs of the trust funds and will pay a rate of interest , calculated at the time of issue , equal to the average market yield on all marketable interest - bearing obligations of the united states that are not due or callable ( redeemable ) for at least four years . marketable federal securities purchased by the trust funds may be sold at the market price and special issue obligations may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest ( without penalty for redemption before maturity ) . the treasury department has determined that the purchase of marketable federal securities ( i.e. in practice , however , open market purchases have been rare .