this report is pending . in the 110 th congress , as in the 109 th congress , legislative efforts focused on helping economically struggling communities comply with the arsenic rule and other drinking water standards . various bills were offered to promote small system compliance by providing technical assistance , financial assistance , and / or compliance flexibility . the senate environment and public works committee reported several bills that would have authorized new funding for drinking water infrastructure . the water infrastructure financing act ( s. 3617 , s.rept . 110-509 ) , which paralleled the committee bill from the 109 th congress , proposed to increase funding authority for epa's drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) program and clean water state revolving fund ( cwsrf ) program and to create a grant program at epa for small or economically disadvantaged communities for critical drinking water and water quality projects . 110-475 ) would have authorized a new grant program for small water systems , and s. 1429 ( s.rept . 6313 would have reauthorized funding authority for small system technical assistance under sdwa . other bills included s. 2509 , which proposed to require epa to promote the use of affordable technologies ( eg , point - of - use technologies and bottled water ) , revise its affordability criteria , and provide more compliance assistance for high - priority rules including the arsenic rule . s. 2509 also would have required epa or a state to ensure that funds have been made available to small systems before taking enforcement actions . 2141 would have required states to grant exemptions to eligible small systems for rules covering naturally occurring contaminants ( such as arsenic and radium ) . none of these bills was enacted . arsenic - specific legislation has again been offered in the 111 th congress , although broader infrastructure bills have received wider attention . in july 2009 , the senate committee on environment and public works reported the water infrastructure financing act ( s. 1005 , s.rept . 111-47 ) , similar to the committee's bill from the 110 th congress . this legislation would authorize appropriations for the dwsrf program in the amount of $14.7 billion over five years . it also would establish a drinking water infrastructure grant program with funding priority to be given to small and economically disadvantaged communities . in the house , the water protection and reinvestment act of 2009 , h.r . 3202 , has been introduced to establish a water infrastructure trust fund and to provide a source of funding for drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects based on the imposition of an excise tax on a wide range of beverages , pharmaceuticals , and other products . additionally , h.r . 2206 would amend sdwa to reauthorize technical assistance to small public water systems to help them comply with federal drinking water standards generally . bills that specifically address arsenic in drinking water include h.r . the house bill would amend the exemption provisions to require states to grant exemptions to small , nonprofit public water systems from naturally occurring contaminants , including arsenic and other specified contaminants , provided that the water system finds that compliance is not economically feasible .