appendix a . these included h.r . 5711 , and several amendments to the house version of the fy2017 financial services and general government appropriations act ( h.r . that act passed the house on july 7 , 2016 , by a vote of 239-185 , and h.r . 5711 passed by the house on november 17 , 2016 , by a vote of 243-174 . the obama administration opposed the measures as jcpoa violations . it can be argued that the question "are sanctions on iran 'working' ? should be assessed based on an analysis of the goals of the sanctions . the following sections try to assess the effectiveness of iran sanctions according to a number of criteria . jcpoa oversight and implications , and broader issues of iran's behavior have been the subject of legislation . the jcpoa states that as long as iran fully complies with the jcpoa , the sanctions that were suspended or lifted shall not be reimposed on other bases ( such as terrorism or human rights ) . the obama administration stated that it would adhere to that provision but that some new sanctions that seek to limit iran's military power , its human rights abuses , or its support for militant groups might not necessarily violate the jcpoa . the iran nuclear agreement review act of 2015 ( inara , p.l . 114-17 ) provided for a 30- or 60-day congressional review period after which congress could pass legislation to approve or to disapprove of the jcpoa , or do nothing . no such legislation of disapproval was enacted . there are several certification and reporting requirements under inara , although most of them clearly no longer apply as a result of the trump administration withdrawal: material breach report . the president must report a potentially significant iranian breach of the agreement within 10 days of acquiring credible information of such . within another 30 days , the president must determine whether this is a material breach and whether iran has cured the breach . certification report . the president is required to certify , every 90 days , that iran is "transparently , verifiably , and fully implementing" the agreement , and that iran has not taken any action to advance a nuclear weapons program . the latest certification was submitted on july 17 , 2017 , and another one was due on october 15 , 2017 . on october 13 , 2017 , the administration declined to make that certification , on the grounds that continued sanctions relief is not appropriate and proportionate to iran's measures to terminate its illicit nuclear program ( section ( d ) ( 6 ) ( iv ) ( i ) of inara ) . if a breach is reported , or if the president does not certify compliance , congress may initiate within 60 days "expedited consideration" of legislation that would reimpose any iran sanctions that the president had suspended through use of waiver or other authority . that 60-day period is to expire on december 12 , 2017 . semiannual report .