table 1 . loan rates , fixed payment rates , and target prices * reflects rates that change in some years . na=not applicable . whereas the final farm bill ties the availability of counter - cyclical assistance to target prices for specified commodities,other designs also were discussed . the uraa contains detailed rules for how countries should determine which of their programs must be counted towardtheir assigned subsidy limits ( eg , $19.1 billion for the united states ) . generally , however , programs that are tiedtocurrent prices or current production must be counted ( these are called "amber box" policies ) . thus , marketing loangains,which rise when crop prices decline and vice versa , are "amber" and must be counted ( but only if their value , alongwithother subsidies , exceeds 5% of the value of annual production of that crop ) . on the other hand , subsidies that are not linked to prices or production , and / or meet other specified criteria , might beexempted as "green box" policies . the united states has classified its pfc payments as "green" because they aremadewithout regard to prices or current production . it is anticipated the fixed , decoupled payments in the new law alsowill fallwithin the green box . the new counter - cyclical assistance will be decoupled from current output because the producer would not have to produceany particular crop now to receive the payments . however , because ( like marketing loan gains ) the target pricedeficiencypayments would be triggered by current market prices , they are expected to be placed in the amber box . so , they conclude , if counter - cyclical payments , when added to other "amber" subsidies such as marketing loanbenefits,caused u.s. spending to exceed $19.1 billion , the united states could be in violation of its world tradecommitments . whether that would happen is unclear , in part because of the difficulty of predicting future market prices , but alsobecauseof the technicalities involved in classifying and valuing subsidies under the wto system . "circuit breaker" language in fsria is intended to require usda to keep trade - distorting farm subsidies at or below the$19.1 billion limit . questions arise about the administrative , economic , and political implications of changing ( i.e.,reducing ) benefits , particularly after they are announced and / or awarded . ( see crs report rl30612 ( pdf ) , farmsupportprograms and world trade commitments . ) some groups had argued that their own counter - cyclical policies could be designed in a way that they would not have to becounted toward the $19.1 billion limit . for example , if payments to farmers were triggered by low income ( asmeasured bygross receipts for one or more commodities ) rather than by low prices , they would be exempt , it has been argued . othersdispute this assertion , noting that it is usually low prices that cause low income . the new counter - cyclical aid in the 2002 law focuses on the "major" commodities - - grains , cotton , oilseeds , peanuts , andmilk .