1540 , offered the following clarification . 111-383 , as amended , is to clarify that the only fired cartridge cases ( referred to as expended small arms cartridge cases ) subject to the provision are intact expended small arms cartridge cases and that the provision does not apply outside the continental united states or overrides established department of defense ( dod ) trade security controls or explosives safety controls . the conferees note that the dod would be permitted to demilitarize and recycle expended small arms cartridge cases covered by the provision so long as there is not a significant decrease in intact expended small arms cartridge cases being made available for sale and there is no evidence that commercial demands are not generally being met . the conferees note that based on its current force structure and training requirements , the dod currently makes approximately 6-8 million pounds of intact ( non - demilitarized ) expended small arms cartridge cases available each year for commercial sales . the conferees recognize that the amount made available may change as the dod's force structure or training requirements change . the conferees note that the dod would be responsible for assessing commercial demands for the purpose of implementing this requirement ; the conferees understand that the dod may choose to conduct market surveys or studies to assess commercial demands for this purpose . authority for the disposal of surplus defense property can be found in p.l . disposal is the final stage before the property leaves dod's control . in some cases , the act of demilitarization — destroying the item's military offensive and defensive capability — accomplishes the intent of disposal . dla disposition services manages the reutilization , transfer , donation and sale of surplus military property . the reutilization / transfer / donation program through dla disposition services establishes a process for property considered no longer needed by dod to be redistributed among various groups . property considered surplus can be reused , transferred , donated , or sold ; potential recipients may include law enforcement agencies , school systems , medical institutions , civic and community organizations , libraries , homeless assistance providers , state and local government agencies , veteran's organizations , and the public . finally , dla disposition services manages the dod surplus property sales program . property that is no longer needed by the government may be acquired through public sales , if the property is appropriate and safe for sale to the general public . there are other programs which may assist organizations which may fail to qualify for dla disposition services property as a dod , federal , or donation customer . such programs include ( but are not limited to ) museums , educational institutions , national guard and senior reserve officer training corps units , and the civil air patrol . 4310 , 112 th congress ) contained at least three provisions that my impact the policy governing the distribution of dod surplus or excess property .