many blind individuals have low incomes . low - income taxpayers most frequently use the standard deduction while higher income taxpayers are more likely than low - income individuals to itemize deductible items . thus , as an additional standard deduction amount , this tax benefit for the blind is more likely to go to lower or moderate income blind taxpayers than higher income blind taxpayers who are more likely to itemize deductions . however , if this tax provision is truly based on need , then one objection opponents offer is that the provision does not offer equivalent treatment to other taxpayers with different handicapping conditions who may be in as much need of tax relief . for , just as the blind often incur special expenses due to their blindness , many other handicapped persons ( e.g . amputees , learning disabled , hearing impaired , etc. ) also incur special expenses due to their individual impairments . some of the special expenditures made by the blind are frequently the same types of expenditures made by those with other handicapping conditions ( i.e. the forgoing amounts are subject to adjustments for inflation . an additional standard deduction for other forms of handicap is currently not allowed by federal tax laws . the advocates of the special tax provisions for blind taxpayers justify it on the basis of need . they argue that blind persons incur certain expenses that sighted persons normally would not incur . for example , they say the blind often incur taxi fares to go shopping or to their place of employment whereas sighted persons may walk or take a less expensive form of transportation . further , advocates say , those who are blind cannot mow their lawn , make many necessary home repairs , or perform all their own house cleaning . in general , enforcement procedures under the congressional budget process may raise significant hurdles to the consideration of legislation that would cause an additional revenue loss that is not accommodated by the annual budget resolution . even so , legislation proposing such a revenue loss may be considered without triggering procedural sanctions if it is supported by majorities in the house and senate sufficient to waive the enforcement procedures . additional enforcement procedures based in statute ( i.e. , the "pay - as - you - go" requirement and limits on discretionary spending ) effectively expired at the end of fy2002 , and congress and the president have not agreed on whether to renew them . although it is true that more attention is focused on tax expenditures than in the past , they are still seen by many as "hidden" expenditures . a disadvantage of tax expenditures is that since they are not acted upon in the normal budgetary process , they are able to grow in revenue size and are not subject to periodic review . critics have argued that if it is appropriate and desirable to provide a subsidy to the lower - income blind , then similar subsidies should also be provided to other lower - income groups facing equivalent handicaps .