opcit . "aldridge inks comanche acquisition decision memorandum. ( back ) erin winograd . "army leadersadamant that 650 comanches won't meet requirements. what are the merits ofthisforce structure ? consideration of export issues is part and parcel of any military program . how much might comanche exportscontributeto sustaining the aviation industrial base and balancing u.s. trade ? as a new platform , and one less overtly designedforattack than the apache , might the comanche be offered for export to a larger number of countries than the ah - 64 ? conversely , due to its low observable features might comanche exports need to be limited to our closest allies ? ( back ) this report supercedes crs report 96-525 f , army aviation: rah - 66 comanche , by steven r. bowman . washington,1996 ( archived ) . ( back ) vernon loeb . "fate of army chopper onthe block. washington post . august 31 , 2002. p.2 . ( back ) "comanche cleared to begin engineeringand manufacturing development. defense daily . april 6 , 2000 . ( back ) kent faulk . "comanche helicopter onlast chance to fly. birmingham news . july 1 , 2002 . ( back ) telephone conversation with jacksatterfield , boeing spokesman ; capaccio , tony , u.s. army to make decision onhelicopter purchases in april , bloomberg news service , march 2 , 2000 . ( back ) neil baumgardner . "aldridge inkscomanche acquisition decision memorandum , numbers cut to 650. . defense daily . october 21 , 2002 . ( back ) tony capaccio . "boeing , utx seepositive impact in comanche cut. october 23 , 2002 . ( back ) neil baumgardner . "army ready to moveforward with comanche , program manager says. defense daily . ( back ) baumgardner . inside the army . ( back ) kim burger . "ausa - army eyesapache to fill comanche gap. jane's defense weekly . october 30 , 2002 . ( back ) robert wall . "new comanche plangets green light. aviation week & space technology . october 28 , 2002 . ( back ) ron laurenzo . "comanche's lookingup , but now comes the crunch. defense week . june 2 , 2003 . ( back ) burger . opcit "ausa - army eyes apache to fill comanche gap. ( back ) james asker . "pentagon inspector:latest comanche development plan reduces program risk. aviation week &space technology . may 19 , 2003 . ( back ) the ah - 64d longbow is an upgradedversion of the ah - 64a which includes a millimeter - wave fire control radartarget acquisition system and fire - and - forget hellfire missiles . ( back ) erin winograd . "initial results ofalternatives analysis show rah - 66 contributions. inside the army . january 24,2000 . ( back ) claims of improved maintenancerequirements are based on projections of advanced processes and technologies whichwon't be proven until the aircraft is fielded . in general , more technologically sophisticated weapon systems are moredifficult to maintain than less sophisticated weapon systems . ( back ) crs report 96-525 , armyaviation: rah - 66 comanche . ( back ) winograd opcit . "initialresults of alternatives analysis show rah - 66 contributions. ( back ) burger . opcit .