there are frequent high - level visits between singapore and china . lee hsien loong has served as prime minister since 2004 . lee is the son of former prime minister lee kuan yew , who stepped down in 1990 after 31 years at the helm . the senior lee , 89 and widely acknowledged as the architect of singapore's success as a nation , resigned his post as "minister mentor" following the 2011 elections , citing a need to pass leadership to the next generation . in 2010 , changes to the constitution guaranteed that more non - pap members would be represented in the parliament . the electoral reforms were seen as an acknowledgement by the pap that it must adjust to a more open and diverse singapore . singapore's leaders have acknowledged a "contract" with the singaporean people , under which individual rights are curtailed in the interest of maintaining a stable , prosperous society . supporters praise the pragmatism of singapore , noting its sustained economic growth and high standards of living . others criticize the approach as stunting creativity and entrepreneurship , and insist that singapore's leaders must respond to an increasingly sophisticated public's demand for greater liberties for economic survival . greater , and generally freer , use of the internet may be threatening to some of the leadership ; in the past the government attempted to tighten control over bloggers , who may not exercise the same restraint as the mainstream media in limiting criticism of the ruling party or touching on sensitive issues such as race , in singapore's multi - ethnic environment . although it has been elected by a comfortable majority in every election since singapore's founding , the pap "places formidable obstacles in the path of political opponents," according to the u.s. state department's 2012 country report on human rights practices . the report states that "the pap maintained its political dominance in part by circumscribing political discourse and action. according to amnesty international , defamation suits by pap leaders to discourage opposition are widespread . the political careers of opposition politicians are marked by characteristic obstacles from the ruling party , including being forced to declare bankruptcy for failing to pay libel damages to prominent pap members . singapore has been a strong champion of asean , which helps southeast asia's mostly small countries to influence regional diplomacy , particularly vis - à - vis china . renewed u.s. engagement under the obama administration has pleased singapore and may have allowed it more diplomatic space to stand up to beijing on key issues . singapore has praised the administration's "rebalancing" effort toward asia , yet has been careful to warn that anti - china rhetoric or efforts to "contain" china's rise will be counterproductive . during an april 2013 visit to washington , prime minister lee advised the united states to strengthen its economic ties to the region and develop more trust with beijing . maintaining strong relations with both china and the united states is a keystone of singapore's foreign policy . singapore often portrays itself as a useful balancer and intermediary between major powers in the region .