nondelegation doctrine . the most controversial portion of the d.c . circuit's majority opinion was its embrace of a long - moribund constitutional principle knownas the "nondelegation doctrine. this separation - of - powers doctrine derives from article i of the constitution,which vests "[a]ll legislative powers" in congress . not surprisingly , the supreme court reads this vesting provision loosely , recognizing that congress routinelydelegates quasi - legislative powers to non - article ibodies . in particular , congress frequently commits to the specialized expertise of executive - branch agencies thetask of rulemaking in technical areas - - such asair pollution control . the nondelegation doctrine says that such delegations pass constitutional muster only ifcongress gives the agency an intelligible principle to guide its exercise of that authority . the majority opinion below found that epa had construed caa section 109 so loosely as to render it an unconstitutional delegation . the court agreed with the factors used by the agency to assess the public health threat posed by air pollutants . but , it said , epahad articulated no intelligible principle for translating thefactors into a particular naaqs , nor is one apparent from the statute . given that both ozone and particulates arenon - threshold pollutants ( adverse health effectsoccur at any concentration above zero ) , some public health threat has to be tolerated if epa is to avoidshutting down entire industries . the agency , in the court'sview , had articulated no standard for determining how much . in invoking the nondelegation doctrine , the d.c . circuit drew considerable attention . it was the first time in 65 years that the nondelegation doctrine had beensuccessfully used , and raised serious implications for how congress delegates standard - setting authority to agenciesgenerally . commentators pointed to otherfederal statutes - such as the corps of engineers wetlands permitting program under the clean water act , and therulemaking authority conferred by theoccupational safety and health act - as vulnerable to nondelegation - doctrine challenge , should the d.c. circuitbe affirmed on appeal . the supreme court , however , reversed . the scope of discretion allowed by section 109 ( b ) ( 1 ) , the court said , is "well within the outer limits of our nondelegationprecedents. under section 109 ( b ) ( 1 ) , primary naaqss are to set at levels "requisite" to protect public health - "requisite" being argued by the united states,and accepted by the court , as meaning "sufficient , but not more than necessary. to be sure , acknowledged thecourt , more guidance must be furnished theagency when the agency action is to have broad scope - as here , where the revised naaqss affect the entire u.s.economy . but even for sweeping regulatoryschemes , the court disclaimed any demand that statutes provide a "determinate criterion" for saying precisely howmuch of the regulated harm is too much . epamay therefore be allowed discretion to determine how much of a public health threat from ozone and particulates ( recall , they are non - threshold pollutants ) it willtolerate at non - zero levels . ( 9 ) issues involving implementation of the revised ozone naaqs .