8 was not comprehensive . it did not address many parliamentary issues . as senator lott noted in floor remarks , it covered the issues on which the party leaders were able to reach agreement . "in instance after instance , senator daschle and i discussed points , argued about points . when we could not come to agreement , we said we would deal with the rules as they are . so we got it down to what really matters. for example , one issue that was not resolved was conference committee composition . although the agreement specified equal party strength on the senate's standing , special , and joint committees , it did not specify equal party strength on conference delegations . some senate republicans were insistent that a majority of senate conferees be republicans , reflecting the tie - breaking vote of vice president cheney available to approve any conference compromise . as one republican senator noted , "i think it's absolutely our position , and my position , that we have to control the conferences. the parliamentary stages though which the senate passes to get to conference are usually handled by unanimous consent . this particularly includes granting authority to the presiding officer to appoint conferees , based on the recommendations of the committee and floor leaders . if objection is raised to granting this authority , senate conferees are to be elected by amendable motion , debatable under the normal rules of the senate . on may 24 , 2001 , senator james jeffords announced his intention to leave the republican party , to become an independent , and to caucus with the senate democrats . with senator jeffords's announcement , the democrats held a numerical edge in the senate . on june 5 , 2001 , senator jeffords met with senate democrats at their weekly conference meeting . senator lott alluded to this possibility in the printed colloquy of january 8 . with respect to the ratios of members on conferences , we both understand that under previous senate practices , those ratios are suggested by the majority party and , if not acceptable by the minority party , their right to amend and debate is in order.... ( t ) he intention of this resolution is not to alter that practice and this resolution does not serve to set into motion any action that would alter that practice in any way . the senate did not name conferees through its traditional mechanisms during the powersharing period of the 107 th congress . during that time , the senate agreed to send only two measures to conference committee , the budget resolution and the reconciliation bill , but it should be noted that conference procedures on these measures are governed in part by the budget act . in both of these cases , a majority of the conferees were republican . on june 6 , the senate convened with the democrats as the acknowledged senate majority party . the powersharing agreement in effect in the senate from january to june of 2001 was an experiment . it differed from many established practices of the senate .