historical interpretations of xinjiang's distant past are controversial . china established a military presence in the region in the eighteenth century and later named the area xinjiang , "new territory. in the nineteenth century , as china became a battleground for competing european interests , britain supported chinese sovereignty over xinjiang to forestall russian efforts to dominate the region . revolts in xinjiang against chinese rule took place in the 1860s and 1870s , leading to the declaration of an independent state . parts of xinjiang were briefly held by russia until their return to chinese control in the early 1880s . chinese control of xinjiang fluctuated in the first half of the twentieth century . chinese warlords acknowledged the national chinese government's sovereignty but maintained control over much of xinjiang , while local non - chinese residents established brief independent republics in the 1930s and 1940s . in 1949 the people's liberation army ( pla ) entered xinjiang and annexed it to the people's republic of china ( prc ) . xinjiang was designated as an autonomous region for ethnic minorities and became formally known as the xinjiang uighur autonomous region in 1955 . events in the xuar have far - reaching implications for u.s. policymakers , who in the past have had to juggle efforts to persuade the prc to improve its human rights record – efforts the prc government has strongly criticized – with attempts to uphold and enhance economic cooperation with china . also , the prc strongly prefers that global efforts such as the anti - terrorism campaign be conducted through the auspices of the u.n. security council , where it has a voice , and not purely through a u.s. unilateral effort or a coalition of u.s. allies . in its september 2000 "annual report on international religious freedom for 2000: china," the u.s. department of state referred to prc police crackdowns on muslim religious activity after an ongoing series of violent incidents in the xuar beginning in 1997 , including reported bombings in xinjiang and other parts of the prc attributed to uighur activists . according to the report , the prc continues to maintain restrictions on muslim religious activity , particularly among the uighur nationality . in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks against the united states , the potential for sino - u.s. cooperation against global terrorism may bring changes in the policy calculations of u.s. officials , who may seek to downplay traditional u.s. concerns in the interest of assuring prc cooperation . despite shared sino - u.s. interests against terrorism , it is not yet clear how much actual support the prc will be willing or able to give the u.s. - led effort . a key problem for u.s. policymakers is that the prc commonly makes no distinction between terrorists who perform violent acts and "separatists," even those advocates that are entirely peaceful . beijing officials also may be cautious about appearing too "pro - american," a political problem that working through u.n. auspices could mitigate . also , prc officials in the past have attempted to exact policy concessions from the united states – such as on taiwan or tibet – in exchange for their support for u.s. initiatives .