in addition , h.r . 4737 would have simplified child support assignment and distribution rules , and made manyotherchanges . the state can then do what it wants with its share . it can give all , a portion,or none of itsshare to families . if a state passes through all of its share to families , it may count that as income to the family or it may disregard all or some of thechild support collection so that it does not decrease the tanf payment of the family , but instead enables that familyto increase itstotal income by the child support amount without it affecting the family's tanf eligibility status or benefit amount . some statessend the family two checks , one reflecting the tanf benefit and another reflecting the child support paymentreceived from thenoncustodial parent . states also have the option to pass their share of arrearage collections to former tanfrecipients ( if thearrearage occurred while the family was a cash welfare recipient ) . under prior law , once a family went off afdc , child support arrearage payments generally were divided between the state andfederal governments to reimburse them for afdc ; if any money remained , it was given to the family . in contrast,under p.l.104-193 , payments to families who leave tanf are more generous . 104-193 , arrearages are to be paidto the family first,unless they are collected through the federal income tax refund offset ( in which case reimbursing the federal andstate governmentsare to be given first priority ) . for collections made before october 1 , 1997 . if a custodial parent assigned her orhis child support rights to the state before october 1 , 1997 , the parent had to assign all support rights for supportpayments ( bothcurrent and past - due ) that accrued to the family during the period of afdc receipt , as well as payments that hadaccrued before theirapplication for afdc benefits . moreover , these families had to permanently assign their rights to pre - assistancearrearages to thestate . theseare calledassignment rules . second , there are rules that determine the order in which child support collections are paid inaccordance with theassignment rules . these are called distribution rules . when a family leaves tanf , ( 1 ) the order of distribution of any child support collection depends on ( 1 ) when the arrearages accrued ( pre - assistance , during - assistance , or post - assistance ) ; ( 2 ) when the child support was assigned to the state ( beforeoctober 1997,between october 1997 and october 2000 , or after october 2000 ) ; ( 3 ) how the child support arrearages werecollected ( through thefederal income tax refund offset program or by some other means ) ; ( 4 ) the amount of the unreimbursed welfarebalance ; and ( 5 ) whenthe arrearages were collected ( before october 1997 , between october 1997 and october 2000 , or after october2000 ) . some of thecomplexity of the distribution rules ceased on october 1 , 2000 when the rules were completely phased - in , but theconfusion withregard to the six categories of arrearages ( mentioned below ) remains .