businesses should uphold the effective abolition of child labor . 418 to promote the international protection of women's rights . since the 1970s , public and private expectations of multinational corporate behavior have grown commensurate with the boom in foreign investment . this change in expectations , however , has not resulted in a clear - cut set of directions for governments or businesses to follow in developing codes of conduct . at times , purely voluntary codes evolved into codes that subsequently were adopted as national legislation . for instance , in 1977 , the united states adopted the sullivan principles and the foreign corrupt practices act ( fcpa ) . businesses should undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental responsibility . businesses should encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally friendly techniques . businesses should work against corruption in all its terms , including extortion and bribery . as part of the 1994 uruguay round on multilateral trade negotiations , the wto adopted the agreement on trade - related investment measures ( trims ) , which recognized that certain investment measures restrict and distort trade ; required signatory countries to apply national treatment ; and required countries to provide a framework for reducing restrictions on foreign investment . in 1996 , the wto established a working group on investment , which has been studying the issue of investment rules , including technical regulations and standards that govern trade and investment . corporate codes of conduct and industry - specific codes now exist in one form or another among most large multinational corporations and among most of the developed countries . a recent study by the oecd concluded that most corporate codes tend to be highly specific and to deal with the idiosyncrasies of a particular company , project , or location . industry - specific corporate codes dealing with environment and labor issues appear to be the most common , and most u.s. manufacturers and retailers in the apparel industry have adopted corporate codes that prohibit using child , sweatshop , or prison labor . u.s. companies in such diverse industries as footwear , personal care products , photographic equipment and supplies , stationary products , hardware products , restaurants , and electronics and computers have adopted corporate codes of conduct . multinational corporations generally support the concept of codes of conduct that standardize rules of corporate behavior across a broad range of countries and industries . while the motivation behind adopting corporate codes of conduct can be quite complex , multinational firms generally adopt codes of conduct because they believe they represent good business practices . generally , multinational corporations desire national treatment as a basis for any investment agreement , but are concerned that standards negotiated in one agreement could be applied to their worldwide operations , regardless of the disparity in economic conditions between locations , local customs , jurisprudence , or differences in local business practices . some firms also argue that codes which allow foreign groups to submit complaints to u.s. regulatory bodies concerning the overseas operations of the subsidiaries of u.s. firms could be used as a competitive tool to damage the worldwide reputations of u.s. firms .