pursuant to p.l . 111-148 , abstinence - only funding totals $50 million for fy2010 . as mentioned above , the cbae program did not receive funding for fy2010 , nor were abstinence - only education projects funded under the afl prevention program ( for fy2010 ) . ( for information on the obama administration's and congress' new approach to teen pregnancy prevention , see crs report r40618 , teen pregnancy prevention: background and proposals in the 111 th congress . ) according to a 1997 survey , among the 69% of public school districts that had a district - wide policy to teach sex education , 14% had a comprehensive policy that treated abstinence as one option for adolescents in a broader sexuality education program ; 51% taught abstinence as the preferred option for teenagers , but also permitted discussion about contraception as an effective means of protecting against unintended pregnancy and disease ( an abstinence - plus policy ) ; and 35% taught abstinence as the only option outside of marriage , with discussion of contraception prohibited entirely or permitted only to emphasize its shortcomings ( abstinence - only policy ) . advocates of the abstinence education approach argue that teenagers need to hear a single , unambiguous message that sex outside of marriage is wrong and harmful to their physical and emotional health . they contend that youth can and should be empowered to say no to sex . they argue that supporting both abstinence and birth control is hypocritical and undermines the strength of an abstinence - only message . they cite research that indicates that teens who take virginity pledges to refrain from sex until marriage appear to delay having sex longer than those teens who do not make such a commitment . ( the study found that teens who publicly promise to postpone sex until marriage refrain from intercourse for about a year and a half longer than teens who did not make such a pledge. ) they also refer to a recent scientifically based study of a program that provided an abstinence - only intervention to african - american students in the 6 th and 7 th grades . the study found that only about 34% of the student participants in the abstinence - only intervention said that they had engaged in sexual intercourse ( when they were interviewed two years after the intervention ) , whereas about 49% of the students in the control group reported ( during the two - year follow - up interview ) that they had engaged in sexual intercourse . advocates of the abstinence - only approach argue that abstinence is the most effective means of preventing unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases ( including hiv / aids ) . advocates of the more comprehensive approach to sex education argue that today's youth need information and decision - making skills to make realistic , practical decisions about whether to engage in sexual activities . they contend that such an approach allows young people to make informed decisions regarding abstinence , gives them the information they need to set relationship limits and to resist peer pressure , and also provides them with information on the use of contraceptives and the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases .