fha's market share can be measured in a number of different ways . it does not go into detail on the financial status of the fha mortgage insurance fund . this section provides a brief overview of ( 1 ) how the fha - insured mortgages insured under the mmi fund are accounted for in the federal budget and ( 2 ) the mmi fund's compliance with a statutory capital ratio requirement . for more detailed information on the financial status of the mmi fund , see crs report r42875 , fha single - family mortgage insurance: financial status of the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) . the number of new mortgages insured by fha in a given year depends on a variety of factors . in general , the number of new mortgages insured by fha increased during the housing market turmoil ( and resulting contraction of mortgage credit ) that began around 2007 , reaching a peak of 1.8 million mortgages in fy2009 before beginning to decrease somewhat . cash flows out of the mmi fund primarily to pay claims to lenders for mortgages that have defaulted . fy2014 was the only year since fy2007 that fha insured fewer than 1 million new mortgages . as shown in table 4 , fha insured just over 1 million new single - family purchase and refinance mortgages in fy2018 . together , these mortgages had an initial loan balance of $209 billion . about 77% ( 776,284 ) of the mortgages were for home purchases , while about 23% ( 238,325 ) were for refinancing an existing mortgage . the overall number of mortgages insured by fha in fy2018 represented a decrease from fy2017 , when it insured 1.25 million mortgages . many fha - insured mortgages are obtained by first - time homebuyers , lower - and moderate - income homebuyers , and minority homebuyers . of the home purchase mortgages insured by fha in fy2018 , about 83% were made to first - time homebuyers . over a third of all mortgages ( both for home purchases and refinances ) insured by fha in fy2018 were made to minority borrowers . as shown in table 5 , at the end of fy2018 fha was insuring a total of over 8 million single - family loans that together had an outstanding balance of nearly $1.2 trillion . since it was first established in 1934 , fha has insured a total of over 47.5 million home loans . fha's share of the mortgage market is the amount of mortgages that are insured by fha compared to the total amount of mortgages originated or outstanding in a given time period . therefore , when evaluating fha's market share , it is important to recognize which of several different figures is being reported . first , fha's share of the mortgage market can be computed as the number of fha - insured mortgages divided by the total number of mortgages , or as the dollar volume of fha - insured mortgages divided by the total dollar volume of mortgages .