93-344 , 88 stat . 297 ) established the statutory basis for a congressional budget process , and provided for the annual adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget as a mechanism for facilitating congressional budgetary decision making . it also established the house and senate budget committees , and created the congressional budget office ( cbo ) to provide budgetary information to congress independent of the executive branch . the president is required to submit to congress a proposed budget by the first monday in february . although this budget does not have the force of law , it is a comprehensive examination of federal revenues and spending , including any initiatives recommended by the president , and is the start of extensive interaction with congress . within six weeks of the president's budget submission , congressional committees are required to submit their "views and estimates" of spending and revenues within their respective jurisdictions to the house and senate budget committees . in the absence of a final agreement on a concurrent resolution on the budget , the house or senate may adopt a "deeming resolution" to establish provisional enforcement levels . section 302 ( b ) of the budget act further requires the house and senate appropriations committees to subdivide the amounts allocated to them under the budget resolution among their subcommittees . these suballocations are to be made "as soon as practicable after a concurrent resolution on the budget is agreed to. because each subcommittee is responsible for developing a single general appropriations bill , the process of making suballocations effectively determines the spending level for each of the regular annual appropriations bills . legislation ( or amendments ) that would cause the suballocations made under 302 ( b ) to be exceeded is subject to a point of order . the appropriations committees can ( and do ) issue revised subdivisions over the course of appropriations actions to reflect changes in spending priorities effected during floor consideration or in conference . the budget resolution provides a guideline for the overall level of revenues , but not for their composition . legislative language controlling revenues is reported by the committees of jurisdiction ( the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee ) . the revenue level agreed to in the budget resolution acts as a minimum , limiting consideration of revenue legislation that would decrease revenue below that level . in addition , article i , section 7 of the constitution requires that all revenue measures originate in the house of representatives , although the senate may amend them , as other legislation . revenue legislation may be considered at any time , although revenue provisions are often included in reconciliation legislation . the budget resolution also specifies an appropriate level for the public debt that reflects the budgetary policies agreed to in the resolution . any change in the authorized level of the public debt must be implemented through a statutory enactment . the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( p.l . 99-177 , 99 stat . 1037 ) established the sequester as a means to enforce statutory budget limits .