appendix a . operation of the hospital insurance trust fund beginning in 2004 , expenditures began exceeding tax income ( from payroll taxes and from the taxation of social security benefits ) . expenditures began to exceed total income ( tax income plus all other sources of revenue ) in 2008 , and hospital insurance ( hi ) assets ( the balance of the hi trust fund at the beginning of the year ) were used to meet the portion of expenditures that exceeded income . expenditures exceeded income every year from 2008 through 2015 . in 2016 and 2017 , the hi trust fund ran a small surplus . beginning in 2018 , expenditures are expected to again exceed income each year , with trust fund assets making up the difference , until the asset balance is depleted in 2026 . at that time , the hi trust fund would no longer have sufficient funds to allow for the full payment of part a expenditures ( see table a - 1 , below , for historical and projected medicare financial data through 2027 ) . appendix b . historical payroll tax rate . the self - employed pay 2.9% . despite enactment of bbra 99 and bipa 2000 , which increased program spending , the 2001 and 2002 medicare trustees reports continued to delay the projected insolvency date . these improvements in solvency projections reflected both stronger - than - expected economic growth and lower - than - expected program costs due to lower projected enrollment in medicare part c , heightened antifraud and abuse initiatives , and lower - than - expected increases in health care costs . the 2003 report projections , however , shifted direction . unless action is taken prior to that date to increase revenues or to decrease expenditures ( or some combination of the two ) , congress may face a legislative decision regarding whether , and how , to provide for another source of funding ( eg , general revenues ) to make up for these deficits . much of the concern about the financial status of medicare tends to focus on the hi trust fund date of insolvency , when medicare no longer has the authority to pay for part a health care services in full . this focus can , however , detract from the larger issues confronting the medicare program as a whole and from the program's current and future impact on the federal budget and on taxpayers . when viewed from the perspective of the entire federal budget , as the number of beneficiaries and per capita health care costs continue to grow , total medicare spending obligations ( hi and smi spending combined ) are expected to place increasing demands on federal budgetary resources . the projected insolvency date was 2026 , four years earlier than the 2030 date projected in the 2002 report . the revision was due to lower - than - expected hi - taxable payroll and higher - than - expected hospital expenditures . in the next year , the 2004 report projected that the hi trust fund would become insolvent in 2019 , seven years earlier than projected in 2003 .