the provision appears below . ( a ) requirement - section 418 of title 37 , united states code , is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ( d ) ( 1 ) in the case of athletic footwear needed by members of the army , navy , air force , or marine corps upon their initial entry into the armed forces , the secretary of defense shall furnish such footwear directly to the members instead of providing a cash allowance to the members for the purchase of such footwear . ( 2 ) in procuring athletic footwear to comply with paragraph ( 1 ) , the secretary of defense shall comply with the requirements of section 2533a of title 10 , without regard to the applicability of any simplified acquisition threshold under chapter 137 of title 10 ( or any other provision of law ) . this authority may not be re - delegated . ( b ) certification - the amendment made by subsection ( a ) shall not take effect until the secretary of defense certifies that there are at least two sources that can provide athletic footwear to the department of defense that is 100 percent compliant with section 2533a of title 10 , united states code . use of dnads requires an analysis of the alternatives and certification of the process . military uniforms are generally procured through competitive contracts . c&t maintains access to a variety of supplies and uniform - related products . c&t specialists may also procure textiles and materials directly from the textile industry , and then provide textiles and materials to the contractors . the materials may be used to manufacture additional uniforms and related products , often achieving higher quality and substantial savings over purchased , finished generic products . according to a gao report on dod's ground combat uniforms , dla managed eight uniforms for the military services as of 2010 . vendors and customers may review current solicitations in fedbizopps , the online source for all federal government procurement opportunities . dla has established an automated system to provide contractors with the ability to conduct detailed searches for solicitations and contract awards . dla troop support's clothing & textiles supply chain has established a 24-hour , 7-day - a - week customer contact center as the point for all customer inquiries . prospective bidders should obtain specifications prior to submitting an offer . such decisions are called "domestic nonavailability determinations" or dnads . according to dfars parts 204 , 212 , and 252 , contractors must first register in the central contractor registration ( ccr ) prior to the administration of contract awards , basic ordering agreements , or blanket purchase agreements , unless the award results from a solicitation issued on or before june 1 , 1998 . dla has stated on its website that price is not always the sole determination in contract awards , as described here . many of our acquisitions ( most notably our negotiated acquisitions ) involve a review of a contractor's technical capability ; corporate experience ; quality ; past performance and surge capability ( as well as price ) .