hearings can be held in washington or elsewhere . however , house rules require that all committee chairs , except the chair of the rules committee , must give at least one week's notice to the public of the date , place , and subject of hearings , although a hearing may be held with less notice if either the chair , with the concurrence of the ranking minority member , or the committee by majority vote , determines a need to hold the hearing sooner . hearings are open to the public unless the committee votes in open session to close a hearing . although the chair determines the agenda and selects witnesses , the minority is entitled to one day of related hearings to call its own witnesses , if a majority of minority members so notify the chair . witnesses before house committees generally must file with the committee an advance copy of their written testimony , and then limit their oral testimony to a brief summary . a question - and - answer period , with rules generally allowing each committee member five minutes to question each witness , usually follows a witness's opening statement . under house rules , a committee may adopt a rule , or agree by motion , to allow an equal number of its majority and minority party members to question a witness for up to 30 minutes , and may also adopt a rule or motion allowing its staff to question a witness , with time divided equally between majority and minority staff . the essential purpose of a committee markup is to determine whether a measure pending before a committee should be amended in any substantive way . of course , committees do not actually amend measures ; instead , a committee votes on which amendments , if any , it wishes to recommend to the house . how a panel conducts a markup for the most part reflects procedures used in the house's committee of the whole ( parliamentary device to consider amendments ) , as possibly modified by an individual committee's rules . there is also a widespread feeling that the level of formality in markup often reflects the level of contention over the measure being marked up . usually these publications are available on - line or from the issuing committee . printed hearings contain the edited transcripts of testimony . they often are not published for months after the hearing , but are usually available for inspection in committee offices ; witness testimony is often available on - line . a markup begins with a chair calling up a particular measure for consideration by the committee . the next action depends on the nature of the "markup vehicle" ( i.e. , the text that a chair intends for the committee to amend and report ) , which may be different from the measure laid before the panel for consideration . a vehicle can come before a committee in several different forms , each of which has its own procedural and political consequences .