this would mark a significant and unprecedented departure from the past . members of congress ( as with the president and vice president , justices of the supreme court , or other federal court judges ) have never been required to hold security clearances . most of the proposals along this line appeared in the late 1980s , following charges and countercharges between the executive and legislative branches over unauthorized disclosure of classified information . a more recent bill , introduced in 2006 , would have required a security clearance for members serving on the house permanent select committee on intelligence and on the subcommittee on defense of the house appropriations committee . the resolution , however , did not specify which entity ( in the legislative or executive branch ) would conduct the background investigation or which officer ( in congress or in the executive ) would adjudicate the clearances of members . the broad mandate for such clearances could be applied to four different groups: ( 1 ) all senators and representatives , thus , in effect , becoming a condition for serving in congress ; ( 2 ) only members seeking access to classified information , including those on the panels receiving it ; ( 3 ) only members on committees which receive classified information ; or ( 4 ) only those seeking access to classified information held by panels where they are not members . under a security clearance requirement , background investigations might be conducted by an executive branch agency , such as the office of personnel management or federal bureau of investigation ; by a legislative branch entity , such as the house or senate office of security , or the government accountability office ; or possibly by a private investigative firm under contract . possible adjudicators — that is , the officials who would judge , based on the background investigation , whether applicants would be "trustworthy" and , therefore , eligible for access to classified information — could extend to the majority or minority leaders , a special panel in each chamber , a chamber officer , or even an executive branch officer , if congress so directed . it might impose an unnecessary , unprecedented , and unique ( among elected federal officials and members of the federal judiciary ) demand on legislators ; create two classes of legislators , those with or without a clearance ; affect current requirements for non - member access to holdings of committees whose own members might need clearances ; possibly jeopardize participation by members without clearances in floor or committee proceedings ( even secret sessions ) ; and inordinately slow down the legislative process , while background investigations , adjudications , and appeals connected with security clearances of members are conducted . the main goals behind this proposed change are to tighten and make uniform standards governing eligibility for access for members . an earlier attempt to mandate such an oath for all members and employees of both chambers of congress seeking access to classified information arose in 1993 , but it was unsuccessful . such information — most of which comes from the executive branch — can be hard to obtain .