background . elected in march 2000 with 39% of the popular vote , ( 1 ) taiwan president chen shui - bian hassince faced an uncooperative legislature and has endeavored to establish a firm grip on his government . chen'sdemocratic progressive party ( dpp ) currentlyholds only 67 seats in taiwan's 225-member legislature , the legislative yuan . the nationalist party , orkuomintang ( kmt ) , which lost the presidential election - the first time it has not ruled the republic of china ( roc ) - holds a plurality of 109 seats . together , threeopposition parties - the kmt , the new party , and thepeople first party ( pfp ) - which tend to be economically and politically conservative compared to the dpp andmore inclined to consider eventual unificationwith china , have blocked , thwarted , and defied many of chen shui - bian's policies . because the dpp lacksadministrative experience , many leadership postswithin the government remain filled by kmt members . chen shui - bian has faced several contentious issues during his first several months as president . these include: an economic downturn ; labor demonstrations ; chen's anti - corruption campaign aimed at kmt vote - buying and gang - related politics ( "black gold" ) ; and premierchang chun - hsiung's announcement that workon taiwan's fourth nuclear power plant , a project begun by the previous kmt government , would be halted . opposition members have threatened to introducemotions of no confidence in premier chang and to recall president chen . however , they have recently backeddown , partly in response to public demands toreduce political deadlock . research trip findings . taiwan's democracy is experiencing a period of rancor and instability as it undergoesa process of political maturation . some taiwanese government and party officials repeated the saying that "thedpp has not yet learned how to rule while thekmt has not yet learned how not to rule. the congressional staff delegation observed severalimportant features of taiwan's "transition politics. one , thepolitical system lacks institutions for moderating partisanship and facilitating the transfer of power . for example,few formal and informal procedures andprecedents have been established for divided government . two , taiwanese political parties do not have experienceforming coalitions and creating stableparliamentary majorities . three , voter identification tends to be unstable and unpredictable . a dpp representativeexplained that political personalities , ratherthan party ideologies , drive taiwanese politics . an american observer stated that intra - party factionalism furtherdestabilizes taiwanese politics . four , the massmedia , though "free," lack traditions of objective reporting . a spokesperson for the government information officestated that most mass media in taiwan,including newspapers and television , are government - or party - affiliated and politically - biased . ( 2 ) there are no firm indications about how taiwan's political parties will fare in the december 2001 legislative elections , although no party is expected to attain amajority in the legislative yuan .