( 12 ) approval by vietnam . the agreement also must be approved by vietnam . the language of the resolution is prescribed by law ( sec . a notice of the effective date of the agreement is published by the u.s. trade representativein the federal register . all alphanumerical statutory references cited in this report are to sections of the trade act of 1974 . while care has been taken to reflect accurately the meaning ofthe statutes , consulting the actual language of any statute is recommended in case of any ambiguity . functionally , the consideration and enactment of the approval resolution and the implementation of the agreement follow a specific expedited ( "fast - track" ) procedure explained below . additional information , based on past practice of implementing trade agreements withnme countries in general , but applicable alsoto vietnam , is provided in footnotes ( 1 ) enactment necessary . the agreement can take effect only if approved by enactment of a joint resolution ( section 405 ( c ) ) ; 19u.s.c.2435 ( c ) ) . ( 2 ) transmittal of the agreement by the president to congress . the text of the bilateral trade agreement with vietnam must be transmitted by the president to both houses ofcongress , together with a proclamation ( 4 ) extendingnondiscriminatory treatment to vietnam and stating his reasons for it ( section 407 ( a ) ; 19 u.s.c . while thereis no statutory deadline for the transmittal ofthe proclamation and the agreement to congress after its signing , the law requires that the transmittal take place"promptly" after the proclamation is issued . ( 5 ) ( 3 ) mandatory introduction of approval resolution . on the day the trade agreement is transmitted to the congress ( or , if the respective house is not in session onthat day , the first subsequent day on which it is insession ) , a joint resolution of approval ( sec . 151 ( b ) ( 3 ) ; 19 u.s.c . 2191 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) must be introduced ( by request ) ineach house by its majority leader for himself andthe minority leader , or by their designees ( sec . 151 ( c ) ( 2 ) ; 19 u.s.c . 2191 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) . ( 6 ) ( 4 ) language of approval resolution . 151 ( b ) ( 3 ) ; 19 u.s.c . section 151 has beenenacted as an exercise of the rulemaking power of either house and supersedes its other rules to the extent that theyare inconsistent with it . its provisions can bechanged by either house with respect to its own procedure at any time , in the same manner and to the same extentas any other rule of that house ( section 151 ( a ) ; 19 u.s.c . the resolution is referred in the house to the committee on ways and means and in the senate to thecommittee on finance ( sec . 151 ( c ) ( 2 ) ; 19 u.s.c.2191 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) . ( 6 ) amendments prohibited .