the coast guard is charged with maintaining surveillance of ocean dumping . title i of the mprsa prohibits all ocean dumping , except that allowed by permits , in any ocean waters under u.s. jurisdiction , by any u.s. vessel , or by any vessel sailing from a u.s. port . certain materials , such as high - level radioactive waste , chemical and biological warfare agents , medical waste , sewage sludge , and industrial waste , may not be dumped in the ocean . permits for dumping of other materials , except dredge spoils , can be issued by the epa after notice and opportunity for public hearings where the administrator determines that such dumping will not unreasonably degrade or endanger human health , welfare , the marine environment , ecological systems , or economic potentialities . the law regulates ocean dumping within the area extending 12 nautical miles seaward from the u.s. baseline and regulates transport of material by u.s. - flagged vessels for dumping into ocean waters . epa designates sites for ocean dumping and specifies in each permit where the material is to be disposed . epa is required to prepare an annual report of ocean dumping permits for material other than dredged material . in 1977 , congress amended the act to require that dumping of municipal sewage sludge or industrial wastes that unreasonably degrade the environment cease by december 1981 . ( however , that deadline was not achieved , and amendments passed in 1988 extended the deadline to december 1991. ) table 1 shows the original enactment and subsequent amendments . table 2 , at the end of this report , cites the major u.s. code sections of the codified statute . the nature of marine pollution requires that it be regulated internationally , since once a pollutant enters marine waters , it knows no boundary . thus , a series of regional treaties and conventions pertaining to local marine pollution problems and more comprehensive international conventions providing uniform standards to control worldwide marine pollution has evolved over the last 40 years . at the same time that key international protocols were being adopted and ratified by countries worldwide ( in the early 1970s ) , the united states enacted the mprsa to regulate disposal of wastes in marine waters that are within u.s. jurisdiction . it implements the requirements of the london convention , which is the international treaty governing ocean dumping . the mprsa requires the environmental protection agency ( epa ) administrator , to the extent possible , to apply the standards and criteria binding upon the united states that are stated in the london dumping convention . this convention , signed by more than 85 countries , includes annexes that prohibit the dumping of mercury , cadmium , and other substances such as ddt and pcbs , solid wastes and persistent plastics , oil , high - level radioactive wastes , and chemical and biological warfare agents ; and requires special permits for other heavy metals , cyanides and fluorides , and medium - and low - level radioactive wastes . the mprsa uses a comprehensive and uniform waste management system to regulate disposal or dumping of all materials into ocean waters .