iran . the report expresses concern that u.s. efforts to signal support for political reform in iran could bemisinterpreted in iran or by u.s. allies as a weakening of resolve on counterterrorism . the report calls for thepresident to make no further concessions to iran andto keep iran on the terrorism sponsors list until it ceases to support terrorism and cooperates fully in the investigationof the june 1996 khobar towers bombingwhich resulted in the death of u.s. servicemen in saudi arabia . it also calls upon the president to actively seeksupport from u.s. allies to compel iraniancooperation in the khobar towers investigation . syria . the report recommends that the president make it clear that syria will remain on the state sponsors listuntil it shuts down terrorist training camps in syria and the bekaa valley and prohibits resupply of terrorist groupsthrough syrian controlled territory . afghanistan . the report notes that the united states has not designated afghanistan as a state sponsor ofterrorism because it does not recognize the taliban regime . nevertheless , it recommends designating afghanistanas state sponsor and imposing sanctions againstthe kabul regime . role of the armed forces under extraordinary circumstances when a catastrophic event is beyond the capabilities of local , state , and other federal agencies , or is directly related to an armedconflict overseas , the report suggests that the president may want to consider designating the department of defense ( dod ) as the lead federal agency for thegovernment's response in the event of a catastrophic terrorist attack on u.s. soil . the report calls for detailedcontingency plans for the defense department'srole , which could include transfer of command authority to the pentagon , in the event of a catastrophic event wherethe command and control , logistical,communications and specialized ability of the military to respond to chemical / biological / radiological incidentswould be required . the commission believes thatadvance planning is the best way to prevent curtailment of individual liberties in a weapons of mass destructionscenario . enhancing foreign student visa data retrieval capability critics of current immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) student visa status tracking mechanisms often refer to them as being in the "stone age. in amove which has been characterized as an effort to "substitute computers for shoeboxes," the report recommendsexpanding an existing computerized pilotprogram designed to facilitate data retrieval capability to more efficiently monitor the immigration / visa status ofstudents from abroad . this would facilitateaccess to whereabouts of students from terrorist - list countries and could "flag" a student from such a country whosuddenly changes majors from a field such as artto biochemistry or nuclear physics . the report notes that one of the convicted terrorists involved in the world tradecenter bombing entered the u.s. on a studentvisa , dropped out and remained illegally thereafter . full use of law enforcement and intelligence authority the report recommends that existing cia guidelines restricting recruitment of unsavory ( criminal ) sources not apply to recruiting counterterrorism sources . alsorecommended is that the fbi guidelines governing criteria for investigating suspected terrorists or groups beclarified to permit full use of legal authoritiesincluding the authority to conduct electronic surveillance . expulsion of suspected terrorists expulsion of suspected terrorists can be a touchy civil liberties issue .