if enacted , h.r . 2990 would have permitted a participant , beneficiary , or enrollee to request and obtain an internal review of his claim within 180days following a denial of a claim for benefits . review would have been conducted by a named fiduciary if thedispute involved a claim for benefits under theplan . for disputes involving denied coverage , review would have been conducted by a named appropriate individual . the external appeal entitywould have to conduct its activities through apanel of not fewer than three clinical peers , and have sufficient medical , legal , and other expertise and sufficientstaffing to conduct its activities in a timelymanner . the determination of the external appeal entity would have been made in accordance with the medical exigencies of the case , but not later than 21 days afterreceiving the request for external review . where delay could seriously jeopardize the life or health of the claimant,a determination would have to be made within72 hours after receiving the request for external review . the decision of the external appeal entity would have beenbinding on the plan and issuer involved in thedetermination . please see the following crs issue briefs and reports for additional information . crs issue brief ib98002 , medical records confidentiality . crs issue brief ib98017 , patient protection and managed care: legislation in the 106thcongress . crs issue brief ib98037 , tax benefits for health insurance . 2990 would have allowed thesecretary of labor to establishadditional standards for external review , including a filing deadline . the plan or issuer would have been permittedto condition external review on the exhaustionof the internal review process . in addition , the plan or issuer would have been able to charge a filing fee for externalreview . however , this fee could not exceed$25 . external review would have been conducted by a certified external appeal entity . for group health plans , the entity would have to be certified either by thesecretary of labor , under a process recognized or approved by the secretary of labor , or by a qualified privatestandard - setting organization . for state healthinsurance issuers , the entity would have to be certified by the applicable state authority or under a processrecognized or approved by such authority . if the statehad not established a certification process , the entity would have to be certified either by the secretary of health andhuman services , under a process recognizedor approved by such secretary , or by a qualified private standard - setting organization . crs report 97-643 , medical savings accounts . crs report 98-286 , erisa's impact on medical malpractice and negligence claims . crs report rl30077 ( pdf ) , managed care: recent proposals for new grievance and appealsprocedures . crs report rl30144 , side by side comparison of selected patient protection bills in the106th congress . crs report 97-482 , the use of financial incentives . crs report 97-913 , a primer . crs report 97-938 , federal and state regulation . agrievance was defined by the bill as any complaint made by a participant or beneficiary that does not involve acoverage determination . once a grievance wasaddressed , a resulting determination would not have been appealable .