appendix a . federal teen pregnancy prevention program funding: fy1998-fy2016 appendix b . teen birth rates for females ages 15 through 1 . the result was that there were 329,772 births to teenagers in that year . in 2015 , 5.8% of all u.s. births were to teens , and 12.9% of all nonmarital births were to teens . according to a 2010 report: teen childbearing is associated with adverse health and social outcomes for teen mothers and their children , although these outcomes often reflect preexisting social deficits . compared with women who delay childbearing until their 20s , teen mothers are more likely to drop out of school and have low educational attainment ; to face unemployment , poverty , and welfare dependency ; to experience more rapid repeat pregnancy ; to become single mothers ; and to experience divorce , if they marry . infants of teen mothers are more likely to be premature and experience infant mortality . the children of teenage mothers do less well on indicators of health and social wellbeing than do children of older mothers . in recognition of the negative , long - term consequences associated with teenage pregnancy and births , the prevention of out - of - wedlock pregnancies is a major goal of this nation . reducing nonmarital childbearing is one of the explicit goals that were stipulated in the 1996 welfare reform law . although the birth rate for u.s. teens has dropped in 22 of the last 24 years , it remains higher than the teenage birth rate of most industrialized nations . in 2015 , 24.1% of 9 th graders reported having experienced sexual intercourse . the corresponding statistics for older teens were 35.7% for 10 th graders , 49.6% for 11 th graders , and 58.1% for 12 th graders . the high volume of pregnancies and birth rates among teenagers is associated with earlier sexual activity among teen girls . also , beginning in about 2004 , the use of contraception ( which was never as high as the use in other developed countries ) started waning . the academic and professional communities also maintain that teen parenthood is one of the negative consequences of growing up without a father . the president of the alan guttmacher institute , commenting on a study about adolescent pregnancy and childbearing in "developed" countries , stated: "in the united states , poverty and inequity clearly are behind much of our high rates of pregnancy , birth and abortion . but lack of sensitive , confidential , low - cost contraceptive services and the denial of accurate and frank information about sex , are equally to blame. other commentators argue that teen childbearing is so high in the united states because of underlying social and economic problems . it reflects a decision among a set of girls to "drop - out" of the economic mainstream ; they choose non - marital motherhood at a young age instead of investing in their own economic progress because they feel they have little chance of advancement . for detailed information on findings from the first cohort of oah tpp grantees , see the september 30 , 2016 , special supplement to the american journal of public health .