a , tit . ii , subtitle d , ch . 1952 , the fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003 ( fact act ) , subject to certain exceptions , affiliated companies may not share customer information for marketing solicitations unless the consumer is provided clear and conspicuous notification that the information may be exchanged for such purposes and an opportunity and a simple method to opt out . among the exceptions are solicitations based on preexisting business relationships ; based on current employer's employee benefit plan ; in response to a consumer's request or authorization ; and as required by state unfair discrimination in insurance laws . the 2003 amendments also require the agencies to conduct regular joint studies of information sharing practices of affiliated companies and make reports to congress every three years . title v of glba ( p.l . 106-102 ) contains the privacy provisions enacted in conjunction with 1999 financial modernization legislation . these privacy provisions preempt state law except to the extent that the state law provides greater protection to consumers . the consumer financial protection act of 2010 , title x of p.l . 111-203 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank ) , makes the newly created consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , which is located within the federal reserve system , the major rulemaking and enforcement authority for federal consumer protection laws , including the glba privacy provisions . as originally enacted , glba allocated rulemaking and enforcement authority to an array of federal and state financial regulators . glba requires that federal regulators issue rules that call for financial institutions to establish standards to insure the security and confidentiality of customer records . it prohibits financial institutions from disclosing nonpublic personal information to unaffiliated third parties without providing customers the opportunity to decline to have such information disclosed . also included are prohibitions on disclosing customer account numbers to unaffiliated third parties for use in telemarketing , direct mail marketing , or other marketing through electronic mail . under this legislation , financial institutions are required to disclose , initially when a customer relationship is established and annually , thereafter , their privacy policies , including their policies with respect to sharing information with affiliates and non - affiliated third parties . under section 503 ( c ) of glba , as added by section 728 of the financial services regulatory relief act of 2006 , p.l . 109-351 , the federal functional regulators were required to propose model forms for glba privacy notices . on march 29 , 2007 , the agencies issued a notice proposing a model form . they subsequently published final amendments to their regulations incorporating a model privacy form which financial institutions may use to disclose their privacy policies . initially , regulations implementing glba's privacy requirements were the product of joint rulemaking and were found in various sections of the code of federal regulations . they became effective on november 13 , 2000 . identity theft and pretext calling guidelines were issued to banks on april 6 , 2001 . insurance industry compliance has been handled on a state - by - state basis by the appropriate state authority .