in the 110 th congress , h.r . 1204 ( 527 transparency act of 2007 ) would have no longer allowed section 527 political organizations to file the periodic contribution and expenditure reports with the irs on a non - monthly basis . instead , all political organizations that report to the irs would have been required to file monthly reports , in addition to pre - election , post - general election , and year - end reports . an organization that failed to file in a timely fashion would have faced a penalty equal to 30% of the expenditures and contributions that were not adequately reported , with the organization's managers jointly and severally liable for the penalty . additionally , contributions to that organization would have been subject to the gift tax . the following chart compares the timing of election activity reporting requirements imposed by the internal revenue code and the federal election campaign act . no legislation has yet been introduced in the 111 th congress that would amend the timing of the reporting requirements in the irc or feca . the organizations would have been required to notify their contributors about the failure within 90 days of the irs's final determination that the failure had occurred . finally , the bill would have required that the reports be simultaneously filed with the fec . section 527 political organizations include the entities colloquially known as "527s" or "527 groups" that have been controversial during recent election cycles . these groups , which benefit from section 527 tax - exempt status , seemingly intend to influence federal elections in ways that may place them outside the feca definition of "political committee. because these groups are not registered as political committees under feca , they are required to report information to the irs , instead of the fec . those that are political committees report to the fec ; while political organizations that are not political committees report to the irs . the definitions of the two terms are similar , but they do not perfectly coincide . the term "political organization" includes entities intending to influence federal , state , and local elections , along with the selection of non - elective offices . the term "political committee" is narrower , covering only those entities participating in federal election activities . while political committees are a type of political organization , not all political organizations are political committees . in general , section 527 political organizations are required to report tax - related information to the internal revenue service ( irs ) . other information , such as disclosure of contributions and expenditures , is reported to either the irs or the federal election commission ( fec ) depending on whether the political organization is also a political committee . section 527 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) provides tax - exempt status to "political organizations," while the federal election campaign act ( feca ) regulates "political committees.