all but one of the 15 assaults occurred within the united states . the following table identifies the direct assaults on presidents , presidents - elect , and candidates for the office of president . it specifies the date when the assault occurred , the victim , his political party affiliation , the length of his administration at the time of the attack or whether he was then a candidate or president - elect , the location of the attack , its method and result , and the name of the assailant , along with the professed or alleged reason for the attack ( if known ) . all but two of the attacks ( both against gerald ford ) were committed by men . the intervening years have witnessed a variety of incidents of actual and potential harm to presidents ( as well as immediate family members and other high - ranking officials ) . these situations extend to illegal entries onto the white house grounds and the white house itself ; violence and conflict near the president's residence or where he was visiting ; unauthorized aircraft flying near the white house and , in one instance , a plane crashing into the building ; schemes to use airplanes to attack the white house ; other threats of attack , including bombings and armed assaults ; feared kidnapping and hostage - taking ; assassination plots ; as well as immediate , direct assaults against presidents . in addition to incumbents , presidents - elect and candidates for the office have been subject to assaults or threats . this report identifies assassinations of and other direct assaults against presidents , presidents - elect , and candidates for the office of president . there have been 15 such attacks ( against 14 individuals ) , with five resulting in death . the first incident occurred in 1835 , involving president andrew jackson , when an attacker's pistol misfired . the most recent occurred in 2005 , when a would - be assassin in tbilisi , republic of georgia , tossed a grenade ( which did not explode ) at the platform where president george w. bush and the georgian president were speaking . the tally of victims reveals the following: of the 43 individuals serving as president , 10 ( or about 23% ) have been subject to actual or attempted assassinations . four of these 10 incumbents — abraham lincoln , james a. garfield , william mckinley , and john f. kennedy — were slain . four of the seven most recent presidents have been targets of assaults: gerald r. ford ( twice in 1975 ) , ronald w. reagan ( in a near - fatal shooting in 1981 ) , william j. clinton ( when the white house was fired upon in 1994 ) , and george w. bush ( when an attacker tossed a grenade , which did not explode , towards him and the president of georgia at a public gathering in tbilisi in 2005 ) .