administered by eac . establishes three programs , one to recruit college students as poll workers ( §§501-503 ) , one to recruit high school students ( §601 ) , and one to provide grants for the national student and parent mock election ( §§295-296 ) . in addition , congress has provided appropriations to fund eac operations ( §210 ) , including support by nist . states and territories were eligible to receive the requirements payments appropriated under hava once each jurisdiction had published a "state plan" in the federal register , followed by a 45-day public comment period and the filing of a certification with the eac . the state plans were published on march 24 , 2004 . the initial $2.3 billion appropriations , in fy2003 and fy2004 , could not be allocated until establishment of the eac and publication of the state plans . the eac distributed all of that funding to states by december 2005 ; no additional funding for requirements payments was appropriated until fy2008 , when $115 million was appropriated . an additional $100 million was appropriated for fy2009 . those payments have also been distributed . several of the issues discussed herein are likely to continue to be relevant with respect to hava , including funding for programs to support election administration investments and activities by the states . no funds for payments to states for election administration programs have been appropriated since fy2010 . among specific potential uses for such payments are replacement of obsolete voting equipment and improvements in the security of the election infrastructure . the eac did not have any commissioners for a period of time between december 2011 and january 2015 . the senate approved nominations for three of the four commissioner seats on december 16 , 2014 , and the new commissioners were sworn in on january 13 , 2015 . tasks that require commissioner approval , such as adopting revisions to hava guidance and voting system guidelines , holding public hearings , and issuing new advisory opinions , have resumed . a fourth commissioner was nominated in april 2016 . the increased use of information technology in election administration , spurred by hava requirements as well as the broad integration of such technology into business and government activities , has arguably improved many aspects of the election process , but it also creates challenges . especially prominent in the run - up to the 2016 election have been cybersecurity and the aging of the technology that is currently in use . legislation to either eliminate or reauthorize the eac was introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses . legislation to eliminate the agency was again introduced in the 114 th congress and was reported by the committee on house administration on march 4 , 2015 . the eac has been criticized by some for exceeding its authority , or for being slow , ineffectual , or even unnecessary . others believe that the agency is a necessary federal resource for improving election administration and has been hampered by budgetary constraints and difficulties in the nomination process for commissioners . voter identification and management of voter registration remain controversial in some cases , with some state laws being challenged in the courts . requires application .