the influence of committees over measures extends to their consideration on the floor . the chair and ranking member of the committee or subcommittee that considered the measure ( or their designees ) normally manage floor debate for their respective parties . these terms may include restrictions on offering and debating amendments . other measures are considered under a few different procedures , where little or no debate and amendment is the norm . in the senate , noncontroversial measures ordinarily are called up by unanimous consent , and disposed of with little or no debate and no amendment . more controversial or complex measures may be considered under the provisions of a time agreement ( or other unanimous consent agreement ) , which may restrict senators' freedom of debate and amendment in part by establishing time limits on actions related to the measure . alternatively , such a measure may require a motion to proceed to its consideration , which generally is debatable and must be agreed to by majority vote . managers guide measures through final disposition by the chamber , which includes planning parliamentary strategy , controlling time for debate , responding to questions from colleagues , warding off unwanted amendments , and building coalitions in favor of their positions . especially in the house , committee members also have priority in recognition to offer floor amendments . committees' responsibilities extend beyond a measure's initial passage by the chambers to its enactment into law . if the chambers agree to different versions of a measure , the leaders of the reporting committees may facilitate its transmittal between the chambers to obtain agreement on one version . if , however , the chambers decide to reconcile their differences at a conference committee , members of the reporting committees will comprise most of the negotiators . in practice , the chambers rely on the chair and ranking member of the reporting committee to choose which of their party colleagues on a committees will serve as conferees . finally , the chair and ranking member often head their chamber's delegations in conference . decentralization is the most distinctive characteristic of the congressional committee system . because of the high volume and complexity of its work , congress divides its legislative , oversight , and internal administrative tasks among committees and subcommittees . within assigned subject areas , committees and subcommittees gather information ; compare and evaluate legislative alternatives ; identify policy problems and propose solutions to them ; select , determine the text of , and report out measures for the full chambers to consider ; monitor executive branch performance of duties ( oversight ) ; and look into allegations of wrongdoing ( investigation ) . although congress has used committees since its first meetings in 1789 , the 1946 legislative reorganization act ( 60 stat . 812 ) set the foundation of today's committee system . the house and senate each have their own committees and related rules of procedure , which are similar but not identical . within the guidelines of chamber rules , each committee adopts its own rules addressing organizational , structural , and procedural issues ; thus , even within a chamber , there is considerable variation among panels .