the court of appeals for the d.c . circuit disagreed , upholding the fcc's interpretation of the statute . the court found , that while section 224 did exclude ilecs from the definition of telecommunications carriers , that exclusion only applied to section 224 ( e ) which permits the fcc to regulate charges for pole attachments to telecommunications carriers when the parties fail to resolve a dispute regarding those charges . the fcc was permitted to interpret section 224 ( a ) , which allows the commission to regulate pole attachments for providers of telecommunications services more generally , to apply to ilecs . the utility companies also challenged the fcc's decision to adopt telecom rates that were substantially equivalent to cable rates for pole attachments and the amendments to the calculation of the so - called "refund period. the court accorded deference to the fcc's interpretation of section 224 in both of those instances , as well , and denied the utility companies' petition to review the fcc's order amending its regulations under section 224 in full . congress has also taken steps to encourage the deployment of wireless facilities . this report will discuss some of the important legal developments related to broadband facilities deployment . section 704 of the telecommunications act of 1996 governs federal , state , and local regulation of the siting of "personal wireless service facilities" or cellular communication towers . under the 1996 act , state and local governments are prohibited from unreasonably discriminating among "providers of functionally equivalent services. this prohibition has been interpreted to provide state and local governments with the "flexibility to treat facilities that create different visual , aesthetic , or safety concerns differently to the extent permitted under generally applicable zoning requirements even if those facilities provide functionally equivalent services. , lower ) the rates utilities could charge telecommunications carriers bringing those rates closer to the rates charged to cable providers ; and reformulate the timing of the calculation of refunds when attachers are overcharged . the general services administration is also required by section 6409 ( c ) to develop master contracts for wireless facilities siting . the contracts will govern the placement of wireless antenna structures on buildings and other property owned by the federal government . in developing the contracts , the gsa is required to standardize the treatment of the placement of wireless antennae on federal property , among other considerations . similar to the fcc's efforts to increase the deployment of wireless facilities across the country , the agency launched a similar effort to streamline the process of collocation of equipment on existing poles owned by utility companies . however , generalized aesthetic concerns will not be considered "substantial evidence" to support the denial of a permit . this provision not only applies to outright bans on tower siting , but also to situations where a state or local government's "criteria or their administration effectively preclude towers no matter what the carrier does. in these cases , the carrier must show "not just that this application has been rejected but that further reasonable efforts are so likely to be fruitless that it is a waste of time even to try.