caribbean basin initiative — cbi ) . therefore , there is no pressure to accept a deeper ftaa in place of unilateral preferences and brazil has instead pressed to begin u.s. - mercosur market access talks . u.s. - brazil differences were the major factor determining the outcome of the 2003 jointly - authored ministerial declaration . although the ministerial declaration reaffirms the commitment to complete a "comprehensive and balanced" agreement , it does so in the context of a rather unorthodox compromise . the declaration states that " countries may assume different levels of commitments...[with a] common set of rights and obligations applicable to all countries...[and may also] choose , within the ftaa , to agree to additional obligations and benefits. bolivia has since sought to join mercosur , which would unite in one trade pact nearly all opposition to the ftaa . as the ftaa negotiations continue to flounder , the trade dynamics of the region appear to be shifting . the region may be heading toward a competitive if not bifurcated approach toward economic integration , with the united states and its ftas on one side and an expanding mercosur customs union approach on the other . those countries still not committed to either , such as the caribbean nations , which support restarting the ftaa talks , would seem to be in an awkward middle position . given that developing country trade preference programs such as the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) and the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) are due to expire during the second session of the 110 th congress , the u.s. trade strategy for the region may be up for reconsideration , particularly if the wto doha round fails to reach a "successful" conclusion . the ftaa was initially proposed to simplify trade relations with a balanced , comprehensive , single undertaking in which all countries would be treated equally . this approach proved to be too difficult to reconcile , slowing progress and giving way to a host of subregional agreements that will likely further complicate trade and investment decisions , if not the ftaa negotiations themselves . the lack of movement has created an opportunity for anti - ftaa forces , so that getting the ftaa back on track in 2009 or later is one of the major challenges to u.s. - latin america trade policy . recent political realignments in latin america suggest this task may only become more difficult . the additional obligations may be defined in plurilateral negotiations , with a country's benefits being linked to the obligations it undertakes . the trade negotiating committee ( tnc ) was instructed to clarify the differences , which so far has not been possible . the fourth , and last , summit of the americas at mar del plata in november 2005 was punctuated by violent protests against president bush and u.s. policy in general , as well as a failure to set a date for restarting ftaa talks . some interpreted this as a sign of diminished u.s. influence in the region , which could bode poorly for any hope of resurrecting the ftaa in the near future .