security . since the august 1998 bombing of two u.s. embassies in africa , state has made personneland information security a top priority . the administration is requesting $1.3 billion , an increase of 22% over thefy2001enacted $1.07 billion . of the total security request , $665 million would be for construction of secure embassies,$211million for the continuation of perimeter security program , and $424 million for an ongoing security readinessprogram . personnel . the fy2002 budget request would provide a 17% increase in state'sdiplomatic andconsular affairs account which provides for salaries and expenses of the department's personnel . this increaseisintended to"reinvigorate" a foreign and civil service that has failed to attract or retain the "best and the brightest"in recentyears . state department officials assert that the agency currently has a shortfall of about 1,100 people . theadministrationis proposing a multi - year program ( for which the fy2002 budget request would provide an initial tranche ) to fillthe currentgap in personnel , enhance retention and training , and provide for a float allowing personnel to take leaves of absencefortraining , without leaving a position empty . initially , the state department seeks to hire 360 personnel ( both inforeign andcivil service ) , 186 security professionals , and some fsn replacements . this hiring , according to state departmentbudgetofficials , would be separate from filling positions due to attrition . information technology . in recent years , state department technology acquisition has not kept pacewith its needs and with technology advancements . this condition was exacerbated by the october 1999 merger ofthe u.s.information agency ( usia ) - an agency whose mission includes providing information and outreach to foreignpublics - intothe department of state where classified communication and information is required . the capital investment fund ( cif ) ,established by the foreign relations authorization act of fy1994 / 95 ( p.l . 103-236 ) , provides funding for thedepartment's information technology and capital equipment . as recently as fy1997 the cif appropriation was$24.6million but grew by fy2000 to $96 million . the bush administration is requesting $250 million to connect statedepartment offices worldwide with classified local area network ( lan ) capabilities as well as providing everydesktopwith unclassified internet capabilities . counternarcotics activities . the largest foreign aid increase sought by the bush administrationwould supplement and broaden the $1 billion colombia counternarcotics program funded in fy2000 with a new$731million andean regional initiative . the objective is to address drug production and trafficking problems that may havemigrated from colombia to surrounding states . it further differs from the fy2000 initiative by providing morefunding foralternative development programs . security assistance . strategic - oriented economic assistance , provided through the economic supportfund ( esf ) , non - proliferation , and military assistance accounts are heavily concentrated in the middle east , asituation thatwill continue in fy2002 . military aid for israel will grow by $60 million , but overall security assistance to egyptand israelwill decline by $100 million as part of a ten - year plan to reduce aid to these two countries . nevertheless , israel andegyptwill remain the largest recipients of american aid , with amounts totaling about $2.76 billion and $1.96 billion,respectively .