ipr . while china has enacted a variety of new ipr laws and periodical crackdowns on ipr violators , the piracy rate in china forcopyrighted products is estimated to be at 90% . the chinese government estimates the value of pirated goods madein china at $19 to $24 billion . u.s.industry officials estimate that ipr piracy in china cost u.s. firms $2.6 billion in lost sales in 2003 . some membersof congress have called on theadministration to bring a case against china in the wto over its lack of ipr enforcement . in april 2004 , chinapledged to "significantly reduce" iprinfringement levels by increasing efforts to halt production , imports , and sales of counterfeit goods , and loweringthe threshold for criminal prosecution of iprviolations . some analysts argue that china's compliance with its wto obligations is being hampered by resistance to reforms by central and local government officialsseeking to protect or promote industries under their jurisdictions , government corruption , and lack of resourcesdevoted by the central government to ensure thatwto reforms are carried out in a uniform and consistent manner ( especially in regards to ipr enforcement ) . although chinese government officials havepromised to implement wto related reforms , it appears that they are concerned that trade liberalization could causemajor employment disruptions in certainsensitive sectors , especially agriculture , that could result in social instability . in addition , many observers chargethat , because the chinese government is tryingto promote the development of various industries ( especially high tech ) it deems critical for the country's futureeconomic development , it continues to maintainpolicies that discriminate against imports in favor of domestic industries and / or foreign - invested firms in china . despite the persistence of trade disputes between the united states and china , u.s. exports to china have risen sharply since china became a member of thewto . between 2001 and 2003 , u.s. exports to china have rose by 48% , making china the fastest growing u.s.export market . ( 13 ) table 1 listsu.s . exportsof selected products that were a u.s. priority for liberalization during negotiations for china's wto accession . some priority u.s. exports have risen sharply ( in both dollar and percentage terms ) , such as poultry , soybeans , cotton , semiconductors , and autos and auto parts,while exports of other priority products , suchas corn , alcohol , and fertilizers , have risen more moderately . table 1 . selected u.s. exports to china: 2001-2003 ( $ in millions ) source: usitc trade dataweb . congress will likely continue to press the bush administration to ensure china's compliance with its wto commitments . many u.s. business and laborrepresentatives have complained over a number of chinese trade practices which they claim harm u.s. economicinterests , including dumping , subsidization ofstate firms , "currency manipulation," and unfair labor practices . price controls will not be used to provide protection to chinesefirms . implement the trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement upon accession . accept a 12-year safeguard mechanism , available to other wto members in cases where a surge in chinese exports cause or threaten tocause market disruption to domestic producers . fully open the banking system to foreign financial institutions within five years .