for example , in vote choice,inc . v. distefano , ( 7 ) the u.s. court of appeals forthe first circuit struck down a rhode island law requiring political action committees ( pacs ) to disclose theidentity of every contributor , even contributorsdonating as little as $1 , a practice sometimes referred to as "first dollar disclosure," while only requiring candidatesto disclose contributors donating more than$100 . the first circuit did not express concern with first dollar disclosure per se , but with the disparitybetween disclosure requirements applicable to pacsversus the requirements applicable to candidates . ( 26 ) in regan , the supreme court upheld the restrictions on lobbying byirc section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) ( 27 ) organizations , to which contributions are taxdeductible , because they operate as a government subsidy directly supporting the activitiesin which the charity engages . the court found that disclosure of the naacp's members had exposed thosemembers to economic reprisal , loss of employment,threat of physical coercion , and other manifestations of public hostility . therefore , the court held , compelleddisclosure of members would detrimentally affectthe association's ability to exercise its rights to advocate its beliefs and further , it might induce members to quit theassociation and dissuade others fromjoining . ( 13 ) drawing from its reasoning in naacp , in buckley v. valeo , the supreme court upheld the current feca disclosure requirements as applied to minor as well asmajor parties . in buckley , the plaintiffs argued that the first amendment rights of minor parties weresignificantly burdened by contributor disclosurerequirements since they were more susceptible to harassment and that the government had little interest ininformation regarding minor parties having only a smallchance of winning elections . the court determined , however , that unlike the evidence presented in naacp , "any serious infringement on first amendment rightsbrought about by compelled disclosure of contributors is highly speculative. ( 14 ) that is , according to the court , absent a case being made that the threat toconstitutionally protected rights is so great and the governmental interest furthered by compelled disclosure is soinsubstantial that the law cannot beconstitutionally applied , disclosure laws will pass constitutional muster . ( 15 ) nevertheless , the buckley court did recognize that , in the future , a specific minor partymight be able to demonstrate with a "reasonable probability" that disclosure requirements would subject its partycontributors to "threats , harassment , orreprisals," and accordingly , such a party could qualify for an exemption . ( 16 ) the supreme court applied this principle again in brown v. socialist workers '74 campaign committee ( ohio ) , ( 17 ) that disclosure rules generally will be upheld asapplied to minor political parties , unless the minor political party can demonstrate , as the party in this case did , thatsuch disclosure will subject the identifiedparties to a "reasonable probability" of "threats , harassment , or reprisals from either government officials or privateparties. ( 18 ) in view of these supreme courtholdings , if a case could be made that a disclosure requirement would seriously infringe on the first amendmentrights of contributors to organizations subject tothe requirements , then as applied to those cases , the regulations might be overturned .