so help me god . an oath is mandated by article vi of the constitution ; its text is set by statute ( 5 u.s.c . when senators take the oath , they raise their right hand to swear or affirm , repeating after the vice president . many senators hold a family bible or another item , and some hold nothing . there is no requirement that a bible or anything else be used when the oath is taken . when the vice president ( or another individual of a senator's choosing ) and individual senators subsequently reenact the swearing - ins in the old senate chamber with the senator's family , each senator might hold a bible , another item , or nothing in his or her left hand . although photography is not permitted on the senate floor , photographers are present for the ceremonial swearing - in . individuals might also record a ceremonial swearing - in . after the senators have been sworn in in the senate chamber , the vice president recognizes the majority leader , who notes the absence of a quorum . the vice president directs the senate clerk to call the roll , and all senators are normally present to respond , fulfilling the constitutional requirement that a quorum be present to conduct business . the majority leader offers simple resolutions that the president ( s.res . 1 , 115 th congress ) and the house ( s.res . 2 , 115 th congress ) be formally notified that a quorum of the senate is assembled and ready to proceed to business . subsequently , pursuant to the resolution providing for notification of the president , the house and senate leadership telephone the president with the news that a quorum of each house of congress has assembled and is prepared to begin its work . as provided by the constitution , the president pro tempore is chosen by the senate to preside during the absence of the vice president . referred to as the president pro tem , this majority - party senator usually has his party's longest continuous senate service . when there is a change in party control of the senate , or when a vacancy in the office of president pro tempore occurs , a new president pro tempore is elected by simple resolution and then escorted to the front of the chamber to be sworn in by the vice president . afterwards , the senate adopts simple resolutions to notify the house and the president of the election of the president pro tempore . since the senate is a continuing body , its officers — the secretary of the senate , sergeant at arms and doorkeeper , chaplain , and majority and minority party secretaries — do not need to be reelected on the opening day of a new congress . however , when there is a change in party control or a vacancy at the beginning of a congress , any new officers are approved by the full senate . the senate filled a vacancy at the beginning of the 112 th congress in electing a new secretary for the ( democratic ) majority .