who is covered ? as specified under hipaa , the privacy regulation applies to three groups of entities: ( i ) individual and group health plans that provide or pay formedical care ; ( ii ) health care clearinghouses ( i.e. , entities that facilitate and process the flow of informationbetween health care providers and payers ) ; and ( iii ) health care providers who transmit health informationelectronically in a standard format in connection with one of the hipaa - specified transactions , or who rely onthird - party billing services to conduct such transactions . the rule , therefore , does not apply directly to otherentities that collect and maintain health information such as life insurers , researchers , employers ( unless theyare acting as providers or plans ) , and public health officials . however , business associates with whom coveredentities share health information are covered . business associates include persons who provide legal , actuarial,accounting , data aggregation , management , administrative , accreditation , or financial services to or for acovered entity . the rule permits a covered entity to disclose health information to a business associate or toallow the business associate to create or receive health information on its behalf , provided both parties sign awritten contract that essentially binds the business associate to the covered entity's privacy practices . what types of health information are covered ? the rule covers all individually identifiable health information that is created or received by a covered entity , includinggenetic tests and information about an individual's family history . it applies to both paper and electronicrecords , as well as oral communications . health information from which all personal identifiers have beenremoved is not subject to the rule . can patients access and amend their health information ? yes , covered entities must allow patients to inspect or obtain a copy of their health information , except incertain limited circumstances . covered entities may charge a reasonable , cost - based copying fee . patients mayalso request amendment or correction of information that is incorrect or incomplete . finally , patients have theright to receive a detailed accounting of certain types of disclosures of their health information made bycovered entities during the past six years . disclosures for routine health care operations and those madepursuant to an authorization ( see below ) are exempt from the accounting requirement . how may plans and providers use and disclose patient information ? the privacy rule places certain limitations on when and how health plans andhealth care providers may use and disclose medical information . generally , plans and providers may use anddisclose health information for their own treatment , payment , and health care operations ( tpo ) without theindividual's authorization and with few restrictions . a covered entity may also disclose information for: thetreatment and payment activities of another provider ; the payment activities of another health plan ; and forcertain health care operations of another covered entity , if each entity has a relationship with the patient . forexample , a physician can mail or fax medical test results or a patient's medical record to a specialist whointends to treat the patient , provided that "reasonable safeguards" are used .