table 2 . major u.s. - hong kong trade commodities , 2000-2004 ( $ in billions ) sitc classification , two - digit level . source : u.s. commerce department . date for 2004 estimated based on actual data forjan. the united states continues to treat hong kong as a separate economic territory for such purposes as trade dataandexport controls . u.s. officials continue to work with hong kong officials to ensure that hong kong is not used bychina to illegally circumvent u.s. controls on exports of dual - use and other high technology products and to combatviolations of u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) in hong kong . ( 7 ) export controls . the united states seeks to control exports of dual - use technologies for a variety of national security and foreign policy purposes through a complex regulatorysystem of export license requirements . despite the reversion of hong kong to chinese sovereignty , the unitedstatescontinues to treat hong kong separately from the mainland for export control purposes ( i.e. , controls of u.s. exportsof dual - use items to hong kong are far less restrictive than those to china ) . some members of congress haveraisedconcern that china may be using hong kong to acquire dual - use items that cannot be obtained directly from theunited states , and have called for tighter controls on u.s. exports to hong kong . the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 ( p.l . 102-383 ) requires the u.s. state department to report periodically to congress on conditions in hong kong and its relations with the united states , including cooperationinthe area of export controls . in its most recent report ( april 2004 ) , the state department stated that "hong kong maintains an effective , highly autonomous , and transparent export control regime that the u.s. government hasencouraged others to emulate. however , the report stated that the growing economic integration between chinaandhong kong has presented new challenges to ensure effective compliance with export control regimes , and notedthatover the past two years , inspections have uncovered an increase in instances of illegal re - exports of u.s. dual - usetechnology to china . hong kong and u.s. officials have agreed to boost cooperation on the sharing of licensingandenforcement information and to education the hong kong public of export control laws . ( 8 ) ipr protection . over the past few years , the united states has pressed hong kong to improve its ipr protection regime . from april 1997 to february 1999 , hong kong wasdesignated by u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) under special 301 , ( a provision of u.s. trade lawdealing withcountries that violate u.s. ipr ) as a watch list country due to the widespread distribution and retail salein hong kongof pirated compact discs . ( 9 ) hong kong was removedfrom the special 301 watch list after the ustr determined thathong kong had made significant improvements to its legal regime and enforcement efforts . the 2001 and 2002special 301 reports listed hong kong as one of several trading partners in which progress in protection of ipr hadbeen made .