, by january 1999 ) . members did not agree on any revisions in the initial review and continued to negotiate on dispute settlement issues during the wto doha development round of multilateral trade negotiations initiated in 2001 , doing so on a separate track permitting an agreement to be adopted apart from any overall doha round accord . s. 239 ( klobuchar ) , the innovate america act , would , inter alia , authorize to be appropriated to the ustr $2 million for each of fy2011 , fy2012 , and fy2013 for the purpose of initiating any proceeding to resolve a dispute relating to market access barriers with wto member countries . the dsu creates a standing appellate body to carry out this added appellate function . to date , no action has been taken on either of these bills . the appellate body has seven members , three of whom serve on any one case . notwithstanding the rule - oriented nature of the dsu , dispute settlement in the wto is primarily member - driven . in other words , it is up to the disputing members ( complaining or defending , as the case may be ) to decide whether or not to take particular actions available to them . these actions include initiating the dispute ; requesting a panel and , in doing so , setting out the scope of dispute ; asking the wto director - general ( dg ) to appoint panelists if the disputing members cannot agree on the wto secretariat's proposed slate ; seeking authorization to impose countermeasures against a non - complying member ; requesting that the prevailing member's retaliation proposal be arbitrated ; and imposing retaliatory measures even if the dsb has authorized them . as stated in article 3.7 of the dsu , the preferred outcome of a dispute is "a solution mutually acceptable to the parties and consistent with the covered agreements. s. 708 ( brown , ohio ) , the trade enforcement priorities act , would establish mechanisms under the trade act of 1974 to require the ustr annually to identify particularly harmful foreign trade practices and , where appropriate , to initiate wto dispute settlement proceedings to remedy these practices . absent this , the primary objective of the process is withdrawal of a violative measure , with compensation and retaliation being avenues of last resort . as of the date of this report , 450 complaints have been filed under the dsu . not all of these have resulted in panels , however , and in some cases where panel proceedings were initiated , the panel process was discontinued due to a settlement of the dispute or for other reasons . to date , 153 original panel reports have been publicly circulated . some original panels have also issued compliance panel reports as a result of proceedings initiated by complaining members under article 21.5 of the dsu to determine whether defending members had complied in particular disputes ; 29 compliance panel reports have been issued thus far . well over one - half of all panel reports have been appealed , resulting in 108 appellate body reports issued as of this writing .