limitations of traditional service contracting . advantages of traditional procurement contracting . the principal advantage ofusing current contracting methods for forest stewardship is that it is the system the federal agencies currently usefor procuring mostservices . it is a simple , straightforward approach , well - known to agency personnel and to the potential privatecontractors , andnumerous private contractors exist to bid on such contract proposals . another advantage of using the current contracting system is the opportunity for congressional control and oversight . annual budgetjustifications for forest stewardship , under the current structure or a new structure designed to enhance oversightof federal foreststewardship , could give congress a way to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of agency efforts , while theappropriations for suchefforts could be targeted to areas of greatest need . one major limitation of usingtraditional service procurement contracting for federal forest stewardship is the potentially enormous federalexpenditures on such aprogram . the forest service has identified 36 million federal acres of frequent - fire forest ecosystems , and 39million federal acres ofother forest ecosystems , as having a high risk of significant ecological damage from catastrophic wildfires due toaccumulations ofexcess biomass . ( 5 ) with treatment costs averagingabout $300 per acre ( ranging from $100 to $1,000 ) , ( 6 ) treating these 75 millionacres could cost more than $20 billion - - possibly less but also possibly substantially more . if the lands at moderaterisk of ecologicaldamage from catastrophic wildfires - - another 90 million federal acres of frequent - fire forest ecosystems and 66million federal acresof other forest ecosystems - - are also to be treated , the total cost for all 231 million federal acres could be around$70 billion . suggested modifications to traditional service procurement contracting for forest stewardship could also hamper efforts at improvingfederal forest health . using resulting desired conditions ( instead of tasks to be performed ) would probably bestimprove foreststewardship , because it would focus on what's left on the site , rather than on the activities performed or on thebiomass ( wood ) removed from the site . however , no standardized measures of desired forest conditions for contracting ( or forreporting on agencystewardship efforts ) have been developed , making this approach difficult to implement . in addition , proponentsadvocate separate logsales for any commercially valuable wood to be removed . however , log values often depend on how the log is cut ( log lengths andlocations of major knots ) ; the independence of the service contractors from the potential log purchasers would bedifficult to assure,but important to avoid possible conflicts - of - interest ; and the agency has little experience with log sales . thus,traditional serviceprocurement contracting has limitations for improving federal forest health . most observers believe that , to improve forest health , it is necessary to combine various activities ( e.g . inaddition , dominant or exclusive use of goods - for - services contracts would emphasize stewardship on lands withcommercial timber,and might limit the opportunities for stewardship on other federal forests that need treatment . finally , some observers have questioned whether a broad - scale , long - term program was appropriate .