loan guarantees . local created a four - person board , consisting of the secretaries of treasury , agriculture , and commerce , and the chairman of the federal reserve , or theirdesignees , to select recipients of loan guarantees for up to $1.25 billion in loans ( generally , 80% of the loan maybeguaranteed ) . the loans may be used to build systems to ensure that consumers throughout the country can receivelocal television signals . the board is to take into account whether a project serves "nonserved" or "underserved"areas and whether it would provide high - speed internet access . the act is technology neutral in that it does notspecifywhether local tv stations would be provided by satellite , cable , or other transmission media , but places some limitson which cable companies are eligible . the board's website is http: / / www.usda.gov / rus / localtvboard / . the boardissued regulations for the local television loan guarantee program in the december 23 , 2003 federalregister ( pp . an application period ended april 21 , 2004 . one application was received . on may 24 , theboard voted 3-1 to return that application because it was incomplete , and then voted unanimously to open another60-day application period . however , the board rescinded the latter decision on july 6 . the loan guarantee program is administered by the rural utilities service in the department of agriculture , whichreceived $280 million in the fy2002 agriculture appropriations act ( p.l . 107-76 ) for the program . section 6404ofthe farm security and rural investment act ( p.l.107-171 , h.r . 2646 ) allocated $80 million for theprogram from the commodity credit corporation through december 31 , 2006 . gao is required to review theprogram annually , and criticized the slow progress of the program in its first such report ( gao - 04-134 , october2003 ) . its second report ( gao - 05-18r , october 2004 ) stressed the need for the board to accurately accumulateandreport administrative costs to meet federal cost accounting requirements and determine what portion must berecovered through fees . the "northpoint provision" . local required the fcc to select an independent entity to conduct tests to determine whether terrestrial systems operating in the same frequency bandas dbs satellites ( 12.2-12.7 gigahertz ) would cause unacceptable interference to dbs systems . this is often called"the northpoint provision" because a company called northpoint technology , through its broadwave subsidiary,wants to operate a terrestrial wireless system offering tv programming similar to that provided by dbs , and dataservices . it is seeking a license from the fcc for that terrestrial service , designated mvdds ( multichannel videodistribution and data service ) . who may receive local signals . shvia permits dbs companiesto provide "local - into - local" service , where a local broadcast tv signal is transmitted up to the satellite and backdown to consumers in that same "designated market area" ( dma ) . under both the 1988 and 1999 laws , satellite carriers were given a compulsory copyright license forrestransmitting distant network and superstation signals . that means that the copyright owners must make thatprogramming available to the satellite companies at government - set prices .