desirability . all services have felt pressures to "transform," or at least adapt to current circumstances andexperiences with the post - cold war world . these include opportunities and challenges from a rush of technologicaladvances , unexpected numbers and typesof missions ( particularly peacekeeping and urban warfare requirements ) , new threats from potential enemies withnuclear , chemical , or biological weapons , and,for the army , criticism that it was not "nimble" enough during 1999 allied operations in kosovo . the broadest long - term question is whether current transformation plans will yield the military forcecapabilities the united states requires 20 years from now . should they include a power projection army capable of fighting equally well across the full spectrum of groundcombat ; or , should other services or entitiesassume some parts of that mission ? critics of the decision , including some current and former members of congress , continue to argue for a reversalor curtailment of the stryker decision . ( 16 ) thearmy defends its case strongly and dod has not intervened . the question of whether the fcs will be based onwheels , tracks , or a combination remains open . dod has , however , raised questions about the ultimate number and stationing of sbct's . in the past , it requested the army consider stationing one of the sixunits in europe and thhe first one is now on station in europe . more recently it suggested that units five and sixnot be funded unless they could be "spiraldeveloped" into much more transformational formations . it appears , however , that funding for all 6 sbct's willnow be requested . the combination of theseevents and considerations could , however , open prior decisions to station sbct's in hawaii and alaska to debateand thus create political complications . ( 17 ) the 108th congress may play an important role in resolving the ultimate disposition of the proposedsbct force . the navy , in managing a fleet of about 315 ships,may have an easier job describing the level ofinvestment needed to maintain a fleet of a given size over time . ( 9 ) congress may consider recommending that the army attempt to develop some aggregateportrayal of its fleet capitalization status and implications of various funding strategies . feasibility . the army plan for transformation is considered aggressive . but , by using largely off - the - shelfmateriel , the "interim stryker force is fairly low risk for meeting technology objectives . after an initial slip of 16months , a contractor's protest , and initialhesitation by the incoming bush administration , deliveries of strykers are now supporting the fielding of 6 sbcts,to be completed by may 2010 . ( 10 ) plans for the future force involve higher risk in both technology and time . it is possible that integration of all the specific fcs technologies into a leap - aheadsystem will experience some problems . the goal of fielding the first unit of this system of 18 systems by 2010 isvery ambitious . ( 11 ) previoussystem - development efforts of this kind have often encountered technical problems , schedule problems , or both .