the person designated for this task is the secretary of the army . 5408 ) enacted into law by p.l . 106-398 , established authority for the secretary of defense to operate a facility for the purpose of providing "professional education and training to eligible nations of the western hemisphere within the democratic principles set forth in the charter of the organization of american states...while fostering mutual knowledge , transparency , confidence , and cooperation among the participating nations and promoting democratic values , respect for human rights , and knowledge of united states customs and traditions. the name of the new facility is the western hemisphere institute for security cooperation ( whinsec ) . this institute is the successor to the u.s. army school of the americas , whose authorities were repealed in the legislation establishing the institute . the purpose of the new institute is to help prepare mid - level civilian and military personnel of eligible countries for various challenges involved in dealing with new transnational threats to the region . the secretary of defense is authorized by law to designate the secretary of a military department as the defense department's executive agent for carrying out the responsibilities of the defense secretary in administering the institute . the institute , as a defense department school , receives routinely scheduled visits from standard defense department oversight agencies . the defense department , the joint staff , and the u.s. army will validate the education and training needs for north american nations . in the case of latin american and caribbean nations , the southern command , as the unified command responsible for that region , will conduct annual validation reviews of courses to ensure that they support one or more the southcom theater engagement plan's objectives . each year , not later than march 15 , the secretary of defense , by law , must submit to congress a "detailed report on the activities of the institute during the preceding year . this report must be prepared in consultation with the secretary of state . the institute is located on the grounds of the u.s. army base at fort benning , georgia . the institute was formally opened on january 17 , 2001 , and has begun to conduct training at this location since that date . congress has demonstrated a long - standing interest in military instruction and training of foreign students at u.s. military installations . controversies related to activities at the former u.s. army school of the americas at fort benning , georgia , led to attempts from 1993 through 2000 to effect changes in the nature and focus of the training at that school , and in some instances to abolish it and its functions entirely . the strongest critics of this school , inside and outside the congress , argued that in the post - cold war circumstances , there was no compelling reason to continue its operations . others in congress took a different view , arguing that a military training institution for students from nations in the western hemisphere had continuing utility , but that it was important to ensure that its focus and training activities were consistent with support of u.s. interests , policies and values .