it is led by an appointed chair . democratic senatorial campaign committee: this panel is the fund - raising arm of the senate democrats that provides financial and research assistance to democratic senators seeking reelection and to non - incumbent democratic senate nominees . it is led by a chair appointed by the democratic leader , vice - chair , treasurer , and a board of trustees . republican conference: the republican conference is the organizational vehicle for republican members and their staff . it hosts periodic meetings of senate republicans and is the primary vehicle for communicating the party's message . democratic conference: the conference is the caucus of all democratic senators and serves as the central coordinating body . it operates through the democratic leader's office and is responsible for communicating the party's message . the democratic leader serves as chair of the conference , which is also led by a vice - chair and a secretary . democratic policy committee: the policy committee is responsible for the formulation of overall legislative policy . it provides background and analysis of pending legislation , and organizes briefings and strategy meetings for democratic members and staff . democratic steering and outreach committee: often referred to as the steering committee , this group maintains liaison between the democratic leadership and democratic elected officials around the country . the policy committee is led by a chair , appointed by the democratic leader and includes regional chairs and members . it is led by a chair , appointed by the democratic leader , who is assisted by an executive committee . democratic committee on committee outreach: this group provides a voice in the democratic leadership for committee chairs . an appointed chair and vice - chair coordinate the committee work . democratic committee on rural outreach: this group guides rural outreach and tries to find new ways to reach rural , suburban , and ex - urban communities . the conference is led by an elected chair and vice - chair . republican policy committee: the policy committee assists senate leaders and committee chairs in designing , developing , and executing policy ideas . the policy committee hosts a weekly lunch meeting of republican senators and provides summaries of major bills and amendments , prepares analyses of rollcall votes , and distributes issue papers . it is led by an elected chair , and comprises members of the party leadership , the chairs of selected committees , and members designated by the republican leader to serve on an executive committee . republican steering committee: the steering committee is responsible for making committee assignment recommendations . it is led by a chair appointed by the republican leader and an executive committee . republican senatorial committee: the campaign committee oversees the political and fund - raising efforts of senate republicans . it is led by a chair appointed by the republican leader and an executive committee . it also is responsible for making committee assignment recommendations .