table 2 shows figures on household debt . the major categories of household debt are mortgage debt and consumer credit , which together comprise about 97% of all household indebtedness . consumer credit consists of ( 1 ) revolving credit , or credit card debt , and ( 2 ) non - revolving debt , which is dominated by auto and college loans ( though it also includes loans for boats , mobile homes , vacations , and so on ) . mortgage debt is borrowing secured by real estate . 109-8 ) took effect in october 2005 . in 2006 , filings dropped sharply , suggesting that the new law caused many to accelerate their filings , and that many petitions that would have been filed in 2006 ( or later ) were pushed forward by bankruptcy reform . whether bapcpa will reduce filings in the long run is still unclear . filings rose steadily from the 2006 lows until 2010 , when they exceeded 1.5 million , which was approximately the level during the four years before bapcpa . over the first three quarters of 2011 , there was a slight decline from the year - earlier numbers . a subcategory within mortgage debt , home equity lending , is broken out in the table because it may substitute for consumer credit in many cases . table 2 also includes federal reserve estimates of the burden of debt service — that is , the percentage of household disposable income that goes to repay loans . over the past decade , this measure rose steadily ( but not dramatically ) , until the recession and financial crisis that began in 2007 . the debt burden figures in table 2 fluctuate within a fairly narrow range: from 10.80% to 13.93% . ( during the 1980s , the range was similar: from 10.6% to 12.5%. ) although the burden of debt has risen since the 1980s , the increase has been gradual and would not appear to explain much of the fivefold increase in personal bankruptcy filings over the past two decades . moreover , the decline in the debt service ration since 2007 has not been accompanied by a significant reduction in bankruptcy rates . several factors appear to have contributed to the fall in debt balances . some households may be paying down their debt , others may be borrowing less , and the amount of debt written off by lenders as uncollectible has increased . some lenders have tightened their credit standards for new loans . this ratio — the sum of consumer and mortgage debt expressed as a percentage of disposable personal income — is shown in the far right column of table 2 . the increases in this figure , which between 1990 and 2007 rose more than twice as fast as the debt burden , suggest that further increases in bankruptcy filings ( and perhaps problems for lenders ) may lie ahead if interest rates should rise suddenly or unexpectedly . since 1980 , however , declining interest rates have permitted households to take on more debt without a comparable increase in the interest payments required to service that debt .