criminal liability . rico violations are punishable by fine or by imprisonment for life in cases where the predicate offense carries a life sentence , or by imprisonment for not more than 20 years in all other cases . although an offender may be sentenced to either a fine or a term of imprisonment under the strict terms of the statute , the operation of the applicable sentencing guidelines makes it highly likely that offenders will face both fine and imprisonment . the maximum amount of the fine for a rico violation is the greater of twice the amount of the gain or loss associated with the crime , or $250,000 for an individual , $500,000 for an organization . offenders sentenced to prison are also sentenced to a term of supervised release of not more than three years to be served following their release from incarceration . most rico violations also trigger mandatory federal restitution provisions , because the rico offense involves a crime of violence , drug trafficking , or a crime with respect to which a victim suffers physical injury or pecuniary loss . moreover , property related to a rico violation is subject to confiscation . even without a completed rico violation , committing any crime designated a rico predicate offense opens the door to additional criminal liability . it is a 20-year felony to launder the proceeds from any predicate offense ( including any rico predicate offense ) or to use them to finance further criminal activity . moreover , the proceeds of any rico predicate offense are subject to civil forfeiture ( confiscation without the necessity of a criminal conviction ) by virtue of the rico predicate's status as a money laundering predicate . civil liability . rico violations may result in civil as well as criminal liability . "any person injured in his business or property by reason" of a rico violation has a cause of action for treble damages and attorneys' fees . no prior criminal conviction is required , except in the case of liability based on certain securities fraud predicates . no proof of pattern seems to be necessary . the predicate covers only usury and the collection of unlawful gambling debts . the prohibition seems to apply to both lawful and unlawful means of collection as long as the underlying debt is unlawful . the statute defines "enterprise" to include "any individual , partnership , corporation , association , or other legal entity , and any union or group of individuals associated in fact although not a legal entity. the enterprise may be devoted to entirely legitimate ends or totally corrupt objectives , and rico reaches efforts involving both governmental and nongovernmental enterprises . finally as noted earlier , a corporation or other legal entity may be both the defendant and the required "enterprise" under some circumstances . as for "associated in fact" enterprises , the supreme court in boyle rejected the suggestion that such enterprises must be "business - like" creatures , having discernable hierarchical structures , unique modus operandi , chains of command , internal rules and regulations , regular meetings regarding enterprise activities , or even a separate enterprise name or title , boyle v. united states , 129 s.ct .