usps has long opposed their issuance . while commemorative stamps have from time to time been issued to raise awareness of social or health problems in the nation , usps was reluctant to get into the fund - raising business . the stamp out breast cancer act directed usps to establish the special rate as the first class rate plus a differential of up to 25% , with the exact amount to be decided by usps's board of governors . it also directed usps to issue the stamp within a year , to deduct its "reasonable costs," which would include costs "attributable to printing , sale , and distribution" of the stamps , and to pay the remainder of the surcharge to two designated federal agencies . seventy percent was to go to the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and the remainder to the department of defense ( dod ) . usps argued that there was a strong tradition of private philanthropy in this country , and "due to the vast number of worthy fund - raising organizations in existence , it would be difficult to single out specific ones to receive [semipostal] revenue. usps also warned that the administrative costs involved in accounting for sales would tend to outweigh the revenues derived from the surcharge . philatelic groups also opposed semipostals . they generally thought that usps was issuing too many commemorative stamps , with a broader clientele in mind than that of the stamp collector . semipostals were a departure from the tradition that stamps are for postage . collectors regarded the semipostal surcharge as a tax on their hobby , and pointed out that unlike other citizens who might be unsympathetic to the cause being supported , they still had to buy the stamp or their collections would be incomplete . despite usps opposition , congress authorized a semipostal stamp for the benefit of breast cancer research in 1997 . the idea had first been broached by dr. ernie bodai , chief of surgery at the kaiser permanente medical center in sacramento , california , a constituent of representative vic fazio . on may 7 , 1996 , representative fazio introduced the first semipostal bill , h.r . because the bill was not enacted until january 24 , 2004 , the bcrs was briefly withdrawn from sale early in the year . the 109 th congress extended the bcrs until december 31 , 2007 ( p.l . 109-100 ; 119 stat . the 110 th congress extended the bcrs further still , permitting usps to sell the stamps until december 31 , 2011 ( p.l . 110-150 ; 121 stat . on february 9 , 2005 , the house committee on government reform amended its rule 19 to discourage the consideration of legislation to authorize new semipostals: the committee has adopted the policy that the determination of the subject matter of commemorative stamps and new semi - postal issues is properly for consideration by the postmaster general and that the committee will not give consideration to legislative proposals specifying the subject matter of commemorative stamps and new semi - postal issues . it is suggested that recommendations for the issuance of commemorative stamps be submitted to the postmaster general .