under the provisions of p.l . 111-203 , the federal reserve will now regulate both bank and thrift ( savings and loan ) holding companies . the federal reserve will continue to regulate state - chartered banks that are members of the federal reserve system . in addition , the law authorizes the federal reserve to regulate systemically significant firms identified by the financial stability oversight council ( provisions in p.l . 111-203 create this new council ) . 111-203 establishes a second vice chairman position for the board of governors . a member of the board would be designated by the president , with the advice and consent of the senate , to serve as vice chairman for supervision . the duties of this vice chairman would include developing policy recommendations regarding supervision and regulation for the board . the vice chairman of supervision will report to congress semiannually on the efforts of the board with respect to the conduct of supervision and regulation . the law contains additional oversight and disclosure provisions with the intent of increasing the transparency of federal reserve operations . included is a required gao audit of all of the 13 ( 3 ) emergency lending by the federal reserve during the recent financial crisis and the authority for future gao audits of 13 ( 3 ) emergency lending , discount window lending , and open market transactions . provisions delay disclosure of the identity of borrowers and the terms of loans . 111-203 changes the procedures for choosing the federal reserve bank presidents . as was described above , each federal reserve bank is managed by a nine - member board of directors that is divided into three classes: a , b , and c. class a and class b directors are elected by the member banks in each district . the three class c directors are appointed by the board of governors . the three class a directors represent the interests of the member banks and the remaining six directors represent the general public . the residual earnings are turned over to the u.s. treasury . payments to the treasury in 2009 totaled $47.4 billion . the federal reserve act requires all national banks to be members of the federal reserve system . national banks are banks chartered by the federal government . membership by state - chartered banks is optional . if state - chartered banks elect to become members they must meet standards set by the board of governors . as of june 30 , 2009 , there were 1,502 national banks and 844 state - chartered federal reserve member banks . while these member banks represented only about 34% of all federally insured u.s. banks , they held about 80% of all insured bank assets . the 12 reserve banks are "owned" by their member banks . the stock of the federal reserve banks is held entirely by the member banks in their respective districts . ownership of this stock does not carry the usual rights of control and financial interest ordinarily associated with being a shareholder in a corporation operated for the purpose of making a profit . each member bank buys stock in its district reserve bank equal to 6% of its own capital and surplus .