the full hour is rarely used . tuesday morning hour speeches on or before may 18 , 2009 , take place in the same manner as monday morning hour debates . instead , they are a unanimous consent practice of the chamber . there is not an established body of precedents for morning hour debates because these debates are a relatively new feature of house floor procedure . the term "speaker's announced policies" refers to the speaker's policies on certain aspects of house procedure such as decorum in debate , the conduct of electronic votes , and recognition for one - minute and special order speeches . while the speaker's announced policies do not govern recognition for morning hour debates ( the unanimous consent agreement governs recognition ) , they do regulate television coverage of morning hour debates . the monday morning hour debate period can last up to one hour , with a maximum of 30 minutes of debate on each side . the speaker's policies prohibit house - controlled television cameras from panning the chamber during the morning hour debate period . instead , a caption ( also called a "crawl" ) appears at the bottom of the television screen indicating that the house is conducting morning hour debates . morning hour debates are in order only on mondays and tuesdays . they take place infrequently on mondays because the house is not always in session that day . the starting time and length of morning hour debates are established by the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement . the house convenes for monday morning hour debates 90 minutes earlier than the time established for that day's session . for example , if the house is scheduled to meet at noon , the morning hour debate period begins at 10:30 a.m . the agreement provides , however , that tuesday morning hour debates after may 18 , 2009 , begin 60 minutes before the chamber's meeting hour for a maximum duration of 50 minutes , with 25 minutes allocated to each side . the different procedures for tuesday morning debates after early may were first established in the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement of may 12 , 1995 . these procedures , which are included in the agreement for the 111 th congress , are designed to accommodate the chamber's practice of convening earlier for legislative business after early may . in the 105 th congress , the procedures were only on those tuesdays after early may when the house was scheduled to meet at 10:00 a.m. on tuesdays after early may when the chamber's appointed meeting hour was a later time ( eg , 12:00 noon ) , the tuesday morning debates took place in the same manner as monday morning hour debates . when monday and tuesday morning hour debates are completed , the house recesses until the meeting hour established for that day's session . the daily prayer , the pledge of allegiance , and approval of the previous day's journal take place when the house meets after this recess . the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement requires that the majority and minority leaders give the speaker a list showing how each party's time for morning hour debates will be allocated among its members .