the enacted 2014 farm bill ( p.l . they often call for increased congressional oversight . the fcs counters by citing its statutory mandate ( and limitations ) to serve agricultural borrowers in good times and bad times . in contrast , fsa's loan programs are supported by both the fcs and commercial banks . fsa is not regarded as a competitor since it serves farmers who otherwise may not be able to obtain credit . commercial banks and the fcs particularly support the fsa loan guarantee program because it allows them to make and service loans that otherwise might not be possible or at reduced risk . credit issues are not expected to be a major part of a farm bill in 2018 or to be particularly significant in the overall scope of the permanent agricultural credit statutes . nonetheless , several issues could arise , such as ( 1 ) further targeting of fsa lending resources to beginning , socially disadvantaged , and / or veteran farmers and ( 2 ) raising the maximum loan size per borrower . 113-79 ) made relatively small policy changes to usda's permanently authorized farm loan programs . it gave usda discretion to recognize alternative legal entities and allowed alternatives to meet a farming experience requirement . it increased the maximum size of down - payment loans and eliminated term limits on guaranteed operating loans , among other changes . for the fsa farm loan program , the maximum loan size per borrower for direct loans is $300,000 ( 7 u.s.c . 1925 ( a ) ( 2 ) for farm ownership loans , and 7 u.s.c . 1943 ( a ) ( 1 ) for farm operating loans ) . it was last increased in the 2008 farm bill from $200,000 . for fsa guaranteed loans , the maximum size per borrower is presently $1,399,000 , which is a $700,000 base amount in statute increased annually by an inflation factor ( same u.s. code sections as for direct loans ) . it was last updated in statute in 1998 , when the inflation factor was added . as the average size of farms has increased and farms have become more capital intensive , these loan limits may increasingly be seen as limiting opportunities for some farmers . two bills in the 115 th congress would raise these limits: s. 1736 would raise the maximum size of direct loans to $600,000 . it would raise the maximum size of guaranteed loans to $2.5 million , indexed for inflation . s. 1921 would similarly raise the maximum size of direct loans to $600,000 . it would raise the maximum size of guaranteed loans to $3 million , indexed for inflation . the bill would also update and increase the overall program authorization levels and provide mandatory funding . the fsa farm loan program has historically been funded with discretionary appropriations . congress added "term limits" to the usda farm loan program in 1992 and 1996 to restrict eligibility for government farm loans and encourage farmers to "graduate" to commercial loans . the term limits place a maximum number of years that farmers are eligible for certain types of fsa loans or guarantees .