under circular no . a - 19 , omb's lrd coordinates executive branch review and clearance of congressional testimony and correspondence and agencies' draft bills to ensure compliance with the president's policy agenda , make known the administration's views on legislation , and allow affected agencies to provide input during intra - executive branch policy development . for non - appropriations legislation , lrd plays a coordination role in preparing "statements of administration policy" ( saps ) for congress , and memoranda to advise the president on enrolled bills ( eg , recommending signature or veto , or contents for signing statements ) . brd performs similar duties for appropriations legislation . omb exercises considerable influence over agency regulations . under executive order 12866 , oira works with omb's rmos to review agency rules and cost - benefit analyses . in addition , other oira policy and oversight responsibilities include statistical policy ; paperwork reduction ; government use of personal information under the privacy act ( 5 u.s.c . â§ 552a ) ; information technology investment under the clinger - cohen act ( p.l . 104-106 , 110 stat . 679 ) ; and information security . oira shares some responsibilities with the e - gov office . omb has responsibility for overseeing management in the executive branch . omb is responsible for clearing and approving proposed executive orders ( eos ) and many proclamations . omb's deputy director for management ( ddm ) is charged with overall responsibility for general management policies in the executive branch , including the domains of the statutory offices , plus human resources management . the statutory offices also develop policy and coordinate implementation in the areas of financial management ( offm ) , procurement policy ( ofpp ) , and information policy and technology ( oira and e - gov office ) . omb's rmos are tasked with integrating budget , policy , and management issues for specific agencies in cooperation with the statutory offices . observers disagree as to how well omb has fulfilled these management responsibilities . some have argued that the "m" in omb is more mirage than real , because budget responsibilities crowd out attention to management issues , while others have argued that budget and management responsibilities cannot realistically be separated . omb leads implementation of the george w. bush administration's program assessment rating tool ( part ) and president's management agenda ( pma ) . the part , which omb uses to rate the "overall effectiveness" of programs , has been used to help justify the president's budget proposals . the pma includes , among other things , five government - wide initiatives and quarterly evaluation of agencies on a "scorecard" with red , yellow , or green "stoplight scores" for each of the initiatives , based on published "standards for success. as an agency , omb's scorecard ratings for december 31 , 2005 , were two yellow and three red for "status" and , for "progress," four green and one yellow . reorganization plan no . 1 of 1939 ( 53 stat . 1423 ) transferred the bureau to the newly created executive office of the president ( eop ) .