in june 2006 , the house approved h.con.res . 338 ( ros - lehtinen ) , which "recognizes the potential threat that sympathizers and financiers of islamist terrorist organizations that operate in the western hemisphere pose to the united states , our allies , and interests. it ranked seventh in the world in per capita income in the 1920s . in contrast , from 1930 until 1983 , argentina experienced significant political instability , characterized by numerous military coups , 25 presidents , 22 years of military rule , and 13 years of "peronism. when the military intervened in 1943 , the regime came to be dominated by a colonel serving as secretary of labor , juan peron , who went on to build a formidable political base through support from the rapidly growing union movement . peron's mobilization of the working class had an enduring effect on argentina's political system over the next four decades . even when peron was ousted by the military in 1955 , peronism as a political movement survived despite attempts by the military and anti - peronist sectors to defeat it . after his ouster , a series of civilian and military governments ruled until 1973 when peron was reelected to office after 18 years of exile . just a year later , however , peron died and was succeeded by his second wife isabel , who had little political experience . economic and political chaos ensued , with political violence surging and argentina experiencing its first bout of hyperinflation . as a result , the military intervened once again in 1976 , but this time ruled directly until 1983 , when it fell into disrepute in the aftermath of its failure in the falkland islands ( islas malvinas ) war with great britain in 1982 . it was during this period that the military conducted the so - called "dirty war" against leftists , guerrillas , and their sympathizers , and thousands of argentines "disappeared. in 1983 , argentina returned to civilian democratic rule with the election of raul alfonsin of the moderate radical civic union ( ucr ) . alfonsin was widely credited with restoring democratic institutions , but economic conditions during his tenure were chaotic , with hyperinflation and considerable labor unrest . as a result , alfonsin left office six months before his six - year term ended , letting the winner of the 1989 election , carlos menem of the justicialist party ( pj , or the peronist party ) , take office early . menem transformed argentina from a state - dominated protectionist economy to one committed to free market principles and open to trade . most state enterprises were privatized ; hyperinflation was eliminated ; and the economy was opened up to foreign trade and investment . in 1991 , under the direction of minister of economy domingo cavallo , the government pegged the argentine peso to the u.s. dollar and limited the printing of pesos to the extent that they were backed by u.s. dollars , a policy which helped keep inflation in check , but as is now known , became a major factor in argentina's recent financial turmoil .