one impetus derives from sec . 116 of the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) ( title i , p.l . 106 - 200 ) , in which congress declared its sense that ftas should be negotiated with sub - saharan african countries to serve as a catalyst for trade and for u.s. private sector investment in the region . such trade and investment could fuel economic growth in southern africa , by creating new jobs and wealth . sacu member countries have achieved the most robust export growth under agoa , and an fta may expand their access to the u.s. market . an fta may also encourage the continued economic liberalization of the sacu members , and it could move sacu beyond one - way preferential access to full trade partnership with the united states . finally , although sacu is a customs union , its members' investment and regulatory regimes are not fully harmonized . a comprehensive fta with the united states could force sacu to achieve greater harmonization . a potential u.s. - sacu fta is of interest to congress because: ( 1 ) congress will need to consider ratifying any agreement signed by the parties ; ( 2 ) provisions of an fta may adversely affect u.s. business in import - competing industries , and may affect employment in those industries ; and ( 3 ) an fta may increase the effectiveness of agoa and bolster its implementation . on january 9 , 2003 , a bipartisan group of 41 representatives wrote to ambassador zoellick to support the beginning of fta negotiations with sacu . the u.s. business community has also shown interest in a u.s. - sacu fta . the u.s. - south african business council , an affiliate of the national foreign trade council , announced the creation of an fta advocacy coalition in december 2002 . the corporate council on africa , a u.s. organization dedicated to enhancing trade and investment ties with africa , also supports the negotiations . for these business groups , a primary benefit of an fta with sacu would be to counteract the free trade agreement between the european union and south africa , which has given a price advantage to european firms . the fta could also provide an opportunity to address the constraints on u.s. exports to sacu countries , such as relatively high tariffs , import restrictions , insufficient copyright protection , and service sector barriers . some u.s. businesses have reportedly expressed skepticism about an fta with sacu , citing concerns over corruption and inadequate transparency in government procurement , particularly in south africa . on december 16 , 2002 , the interagency trade policy staff committee , which is chaired by the ustr , held a hearing to receive public comment on negotiating positions for the proposed agreement . several groups representing retailers , food distributors , and metal importers supported the reduction of u.s. tariffs on sacu goods that an fta would bring . others representing service industries and recycled clothing favored negotiations to remove tariff and non - tariff barriers in the sacu market . yet other groups opposed the additional opening of u.s. markets to sacu goods or sought exemptions for their products .