no further action was taken on the bill . 90-232 ; 81 stat . courthouses and federal buildings , some no doubt containing postal facilities , had been named before that . the united states postal service ( usps ) came into being in 1971 with its own separate real estate authority ( 39 u.s.c . all legislation to name usps facilities then was referred to the house and senate post office and civil service committees , and when these committees were abolished , to the house oversight and government reform and senate homeland security and governmental affairs committees . as table 1 indicates , the number of post office naming bills made law rose and fell between the 108 th and 112 th congresses . during this period , post office naming acts were a very common form of legislation , comprising almost 20% of all statutes enacted . many of the persons honored by post office naming acts were individuals of local renown . for example , the 110 th congress named a kansas city , mo , post office for the reverend earl abel ( p.l . 110-353 ; 122 stat . other honorees , though , were nationally recognized persons , such as gerald r. ford , jr. ( twice ) , ronald reagan ( three times ) , bob hope , cesar chavez , nat king cole , mickey mantle , and buck owens . during the recent congresses , many post offices have been named for u.s. soldiers killed in the wars in iraq and afghanistan . usually , these bills honor individual soldiers . congress also has named at least one post office for all of a locality's fallen soldiers . the practical effect of legislation renaming a post office is less than might be imagined . for operational reasons , post offices retain their geographical designations in the usps addressing system , and there is no change in the way renamed post offices are identified in the usps's listings of post offices . the tangible effect of naming a post office is the installation of a dedicatory plaque in "a prominent place in the facility's lobby , preferably above the post office boxes. the plaque , which is purchased locally at usps expense running from $250 to $500 , measures about 11 inches by 14 inches and contains the following inscription: usps , working with the sponsor of the legislation , may take responsibility for organizing a dedication ceremony . the protocol includes inviting the honored individual and his or her family , an honor guard , a religious figure for an invocation , media notification , and light refreshments such as cake and punch . costs for these expenses may be borne by usps from its contingency funds or shared with local community interests . during the 111 th congress , representative darrell e. issa , the committee on oversight and government reform's ranking minority member , introduced h.r . 3137 on july 9 , 2009 .