this protocol is described below . nasdaq processes limit orders , orders to buy or sell a stock when it hits a specified price . the nyse centrally posts limit orders , which permits better - priced orders to receive priority execution there or on the various other interlinked market centers that trade nyse - listed stocks . this is known as price and time priority and all exchanges abide by it . ( both the nasdaq and the nyse are markets in which brokers are required to exercise their duty of best execution when they route their customer's orders . the concept is inexplicit but is often interpreted to means that an order should be sent to the market center providing the best prevailing price. ) but a significant fraction of nasdaq market makers match buyer and seller orders from their own order books . known as internalization , this can result in well priced limit orders outside of a market maker's book being ignored . nasdaq officials have argued that their market permits competing dealers to add liquidity to the markets by interacting with their own order flow but sec officials have concerns about the formal absence of price priority . this was a major sticking point in the agency's delay in approving the exchange application , concerns that nasdaq attempted to address through subsequent amendments to its exchange application . on january 13 , 2006 , the sec approved nasdaq's application to become a registered national securities exchange . as a registered exchange , nasdaq will become a self - regulatory organization ( sro ) with ultimate responsibilty for its own and its members compliance with the federal securities laws . several years ago , nasdaq entered into a regulatory services agreement with the nasd to perform certain key regulatory functions for it , an arrangement that should continue . nasdaq is now officially a registered an exchange , but the sec will not permit nasdaq to begin operations as an exchange and to fully relinquish its independence from ongoing control by the nasd until various conditions , including the following key ones , are satisfied: nasdaq must join the various national market system plans and the intermarket surveillance group ; the nasd must determine that its control of nasdaq through its preferred class d share is no longer necessary because nasd can fulfill through other means its obligations with respect to non - nasdaq exchange - listed securities under the exchange act ; the sec must declare certain regulatory plans to be filed by nasdaq to be effective ; and nasdaq must file , and the commission must approve , an agreement pursuant to section 17d - 2 of the securities exchange act of 1934 that allocates to nasd regulatory responsibility with respect to certain activities of common members . nasdaq's exchange application limits the exchange to transactions in the nasdaq market center , previously known as supermontage and brut , which will adhere to rules on intramarket priorities .