corruption . fatf focuses on the linkage between corruption and money laundering , both of which are generally committed to obtain or hide financial gain . when it was established in 1989 , the fatf was charged with examining money laundering techniques and trends , reviewing the actions which had already been taken , and setting out the measures that still needed to be taken to combat money laundering . in 1990 , the fatf issued a report containing a set of 40 recommendations , which provided a comprehensive plan of action to fight against money laundering . following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the fatf redirected its efforts to focus on money laundering and terrorist financing . on october 31 , 2001 , the fatf issued a new set of guidelines and a set of eight special recommendations on terrorist financing . at that time , the fatf indicated that it had broadened its mission beyond money laundering to focus on combating terrorist financing and that it was encouraging all countries to abide by the new set of guidelines . a ninth special recommendation was added in 2005 . in 2005 , the united nations security council adopted resolution 1617 urging all u.n . member states to implement the fatf 40 recommendations on money laundering and the nine special recommendations on terrorist financing . the fatf completed a review of its mandate and proposed changes that were adopted at the may 2004 ministerial meeting . in 2006 , fatf adopted a new surveillance process , known as the international cooperation review group , to identify , examine , and engage with vulnerable jurisdictions that are failing to implement effective aml - cft systems . in addition , the fatf revised its mandate in 2008 to indicate that fatf "will intensify its surveillance of systemic criminal and terrorist financing risks to enhance its ability to identify , prioritize , and act on these threats. the fatf also expressed its support for the development of national threat assessments through best practice guidance and the establishment of stronger and more regular mechanisms for sharing information on risks and vulnerabilities . in addition , the fatf indicated its determination to remain at the center of international efforts to protect the integrity of the global financial system against new risks from criminals and terrorists . at the g - 20 ( group of 20 ) summit in pittsburgh in 2009 , the national leaders affirmed their commitment to deal with tax havens , money laundering , corruption , terrorist financing , and prudential standards . they called on the fatf to improve transparency and exchange of information so countries can fully enforce their laws . the g - 20 members also called on the fatf to issue a public list of high - risk jurisdictions . in 2010 , the fatf published guidelines for insurance companies and the cross - border transportation of cash and bearer bonds . the fatf also adopted a set of guidelines regarding tax amnesty laws and asset repatriation . in 2010 , the fatf also published a report on the vulnerabilities of free trade zones for misuse in money laundering and terrorist financing .