greece is a member of the eu and nato . in addition to participating in nato's operation active endeavor and the international security assistance force in afghanistan , greece also is engaged in eu missions such as the eu military force in bosnia and herzegovina ( eufor — operation althea ) and the eu rule of law mission in kosovo ( eulex ) . it also has military observers as part of an organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) force in georgia and , in january 2009 , greece assumed the rotating presidency of that organization . ea claimed responsibility . in 2009 , attacks by revolutionary struggle have become more frequent . in september , it claimed responsibility for a car bomb attack at the athens stock exchange that caused widespread damage and injured a security guard . in june 2004 , parliament passed a law to implement the common eu counterterrorism policy . in january 2006 , greece began using new , more secure passports with biometrics to comply with eu regulations and executing eu - wide arrest warrants . it also ratified the extradition agreement between the united states and eu . the greek navy participates in operation active endeavor , nato's antiterrorism ship monitoring effort in the mediterranean sea . the republic of cyprus has been partitioned between the greek cypriot south and the turkish cypriot north since turkish forces invaded in 1974 in response to a coup on the island backed by the greek junta , which favored uniting cyprus and greece . greece strongly supports its greek cypriot ethnic kin in their efforts to reunify the island . in november 2002 , u.n. secretary general kofi annan offered a draft settlement plan to unite greek cypriots and turkish cypriots in a loosely federated united republic of cyprus . prime minister karamanlis cautiously stated on april 15 , 2004 , that the plan's "positive points can prove to be superior to the negative ones," adding that it was up to the cypriots to decide and that greece would support their decision . on april 24 , 2004 , 76% of greek cypriots rejected the "annan plan," while 65% of turkish cypriots accepted it . the settlement process then stalemated . in july 2005 , turkey extended its customs union with the eu to all new members , including cyprus , but did not recognize the republic of cyprus or open its ports to greek cypriot ships . greece has seconded the greek cypriots' demand that turkey recognize cyprus de jure and fully implement the customs union . it welcomed the renewal of the settlement process in march 2008 , and has supported republic of cyprus president dimitris christofias in his direct talks with turkish cypriot leader mehmet ali talat , which have been conducted under u.n. auspices since september 2008 . greece secured its independence from the ottoman empire , the precursor of modern - day turkey , in 1832 . the two neighbors historically have had strained relations , but began a period of rapprochement in 1999 . in order for turkey to become a more stable and peaceful democracy , athens supports turkey's full membership in the eu if it meets eu standards .