the total reduction may not exceed 40% . under both csrs and fers , the survivor benefit paid to the named beneficiary is 55% of the retiree's reduced annuity , payable upon the death of the retiree . federal employees are fully "vested" in ( entitled to ) a retirement annuity after completing five years of service . vested employees who resign from federal employment before they are eligible to retire can defer receipt of their benefits until they reach the age of eligibility . under csrs , a deferred annuity can begin no earlier than the age of 62 . under fers , an unreduced deferred annuity can start at the age of 62 for those with 5 to 19 years of service , at 60 for those with 20 to 29 years of service , or at 56 ( increasing to 57 for employees born in 1970 or later ) for those with 30 or more years of service . the election for a joint and survivor annuity must be made within two years of the date of marriage . to elect survivor coverage for a spouse married after the date of retirement , a lump - sum payment ( plus 6% interest ) must be made to cover the period preceding the post - retirement marriage during which no survivor reduction was in effect . this payment is necessary to preserve equity between couples who are married continuously throughout retirement and those who marry after retiring , because in both cases the survivor benefit is the same percentage of the retired worker's annuity . under both csrs and fers , survivor benefits are paid to children of deceased federal retirees in the same amounts and under the same eligibility criteria as apply to the children of deceased federal employees . if the former employee dies after having begun to receive a retirement annuity , the surviving spouse is eligible for a survivor annuity under the rules applicable to csrs or fers , as described above . if a former employee who had been covered under csrs dies before reaching the age of 62 and commencing his or her deferred annuity , no survivor benefit is paid . retired workers who are the parents of unmarried dependent children who might qualify for child survivor benefits are not required to take a reduction in their retirement annuities . a widow or widower of a deceased retiree who is eligible for a survivor annuity under either csrs or fers and who was covered under the fehbp at the time of the retiree's death can continue to participate in the program at the same cost as applies to workers and retirees . the survivor is eligible even if the amount of the survivor annuity is less than the monthly fehbp premium , in which case the individual must remit the difference directly to opm . if the employee dies after beginning to receive a deferred annuity , the surviving dependent children are eligible for survivor benefits under csrs or fers , as described above . a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) is made once each year in january to benefits paid under csrs and fers .