that law ( p.l . 109-171 ) called for the creation of a digital transition and safety public fund , which would provide funding for further use of the electromagnetic spectrum , by offsetting receipts received from the auction of licenses to use the older analog spectrum for other purposes . the initial auction was held on january 24 , 2008 . the receipts from the auction will fund the following programmatic functions at ntia , perhaps the most notable ( and receiving the most public attention ) is a digital - analog converter box program to assist consumers in meeting the february 2009 deadline for receiving television broadcasts in digital format . congress is watching this transition period , and ntia's role in it , very closely . concerns about changes in ntia's mission and objectives also has been raised regarding the bush administration's elimination of funding for the top program and reducing funding for the ptfpc program . the administration contends that the efforts of the former will be picked up by the private sector , and the latter by the corporation for public broadcasting . some still contend that it is not clear whether all of the possible areas of information infrastructure development have been saturated through the top program ; or if not yet saturated , whether industry will find it profitable to provide the "last mile" of telecommunications and internet connections in areas not yet served . for public telecommunications and facilities planning and construction , an issue may arise as to whether the corporation for public broadcasting has the resources to administer a facilities construction program . the ultimate question may be whether this change will fundamentally affect the pace at which national broadcasting is converted to digital transmission . a second important issue is the role of ntia in the auction and management of spectrum . the third ntia program that is administered by ntia but not directly funded by appropriated money comes out of the 2005 deficit reduction act . the administration also sees ntia having a larger role in national emergency planning ( see below ) . second , some are concerned that ntia is seeking to develop a larger and broader policy role in spectrum management as a result of losing funding in other program areas , such as the top program and perhaps eventually the ptfpc program . because spectrum and its use is an important alternative to terrestrial communications transmission and reception , federal policy regarding its use and applications is an important national issue . some question whether ntia's evolving role in spectrum management is being fully coordinated with other federal institutions , such as that of the federal communications commission . until fy2004 , the ntia budget had three major components: salaries and expenses ; information infrastructure grants programs ; and public telecommunications facilities , planning and construction . however , the infrastructure grants program was eliminated in fy2005 . in both fy2006 and fy2007 , the bush administration requested ending funding for the public telecommunications facilities , planning and construction program . policymakers continue to examine the proper role of ntia in supporting its programs and policies , as well as the overall budget for ntia to support its mission .