duration . waiver projects are generally approved for a five - year period , however , states may seek up to a three - year extension for their existing waiver program under the same special terms and conditions ( stc ) , and an additional extension ( s ) under revised stc for the continuation of a waiver project operating under an initial three - year extension . relationship of medicaid / schip demonstration waivers to other statutes . section 1115 waiver projects may interact with other program rules outside of the social security act ; for example , employer - sponsored health insurance as described by the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) , or alien eligibility as contained in immigration law . in cases like these , the secretary does not have the authority to waive provisions in these other statutes . program guidance . the secretary can develop policies that influence the content of demonstration projects and prescribe approval criteria in three ways: ( 1 ) by promulgating program rules and regulations ; ( 2 ) through the publication of program guidance ( eg , waivers must be budget neutral ) ; and ( 3 ) waiver policy may also be implicitly shaped by the programs that have been approved ( eg , cms approval of benefit specific waivers ) . legislative action may be required if congress chooses to further shape the secretary's authority over the content of the demonstration programs , dictate specific section 1115 waiver approval criteria , or otherwise limit the secretary's waiver authority . as of july 1 2008 , there were 94 operational medicaid and schip section 1115 waivers in 43 states and the district of columbia . in fy2006 ( the most recent data available ) , section 1115 waiver federal expenditures ( for medicaid and schip ) totaled approximately $42.4 billion . section 1115 waiver programs represented approximately 24% of all federal medicaid spending in the 50 states and the district of columbia for fy2006 ( 19% for schip ) , and provided coverage to approximately 11.5 million enrollees . of the 11.5 million total medicaid and schip waiver enrollees , 2.5 million were only eligible for a targeted benefit package such as family planning benefits . there are several types of operational waiver programs including: comprehensive demonstrations . these demonstrations provide a broad range of services that are generally offered statewide . many of the comprehensive waivers operate under combined title xix and title xxi authority and are financed with federal medicaid and schip matching funds . several also include a family planning and / or health insurance flexibility and accountability ( hifa ) component ( see below ) . in fy2008 , there were 32 operational comprehensive state reform waivers in 26 states . fy2006 state - reported enrollment estimates for these waivers totaled approximately 8.1 million , at a federal cost of approximately $38.4 billion . the schip - financed portion of these waivers extended coverage to approximately 475,376 enrollees at a federal cost of $330 million . fy2006 enrollee estimates for the limited benefits offered under a fp component totaled approximately 104,990 . family planning demonstrations ( fp ) .