the usa patriot act ( p.l . 107 - 56 ) limits ricin access to select bona fide researchers who must undergo background investigation by the federal bureau of investigation . also , facilities containing ricin above certain thresholds must register with the department of health and human services and maintain certain security measures . it is not illegal to possess or transfer castor beans , nor castor bean plants ; only the isolated ricin is regulated . both castor beans and castor bean plants are openly sold within the united states , and castor bean plants grow naturally in the southwest . this cell death can lead to organ failure and death . ricin has been considered for use as a weapon since at least 1918 , when military programs investigated the feasibility of bomb - dissemination of aerosolized ricin . such a weapon was reportedly developed by the united states and the united kingdom , but never used . iraq reportedly attempted to weaponize ricin in the 1980s . in 1978 , ricin was used to assassinate bulgarian dissident georgi markov in london . a novel , umbrella - based weapon was used to inject a pellet containing ricin into markov . shortly after this episode , a similar pellet was discovered to be the source of illness of another bulgarian exile , vladimir kostov . some individuals attempting to possess ricin , generally through its manufacture in makeshift laboratories , have been arrested and subsequently convicted of violations of the biological weapons anti - terrorism act ( p.l . for example , in 2008 , a man in las vegas poisoned himself manufacturing ricin in a hotel room . he survived the poisoning and was subsequently convicted of possession of a biological toxin . in other cases , unidentified individuals have sent ricin to government officials . in october 2003 a letter containing ricin addressed to the department of transportation was intercepted , and in november 2003 , the u.s. secret service reportedly intercepted an envelope containing ricin addressed to the white house . in february 2004 , ricin was detected in the dirksen senate office building in the mailroom of senator frist . additionally , trace amounts of ricin were reportedly found in various locales in afghanistan , and an insurgent group in iraq reportedly attempted to acquire ricin . many experts believe that ricin would be difficult to use as a weapon of mass destruction . ricin needs to be injected , ingested , or inhaled by the victim to injure . biological weapons experts estimate that 8 metric tons would be required to cover a 100 km 2 area with enough toxin to kill 50% of the people . thus , using ricin to cause mass casualties becomes logistically impractical even for a well - funded terrorist organization . furthermore , some experts have stated that the required preparatory steps to use ricin as a mass casualty weapon also pose significant technical barriers that may preclude such use by non - state actors . although causing mass casualties would be difficult , many experts agree that ricin could be a formidable weapon if used in small - scale attacks .