6156 , which extends pntr to russia and moldova . it was signed by the president on december 14 ( p.l . the crisis in ukraine has caused members of congress to call for greater u.s. efforts to bolster moldova's sovereignty and territorial integrity against possible russian threats , including during visits to those countries . 113-96 , passed by the senate on march 27 , 2014 , and the house on april 1 , was signed by the president on april 3 . the bill requires radio free europe / radio liberty to conduct a "programming surge" in ukraine and moldova in order to counter "inaccurate and inflammatory" broadcasts by russia . on march 5 , representative ted poe introduced h.r . it controls 53 of the 101 seats in the parliament . it is composed of the liberal democrats , the democratic party , and the liberal reformist party . iurie leanca of the liberal democrats is prime minister . igor corman of the democratic party is chairman of the parliament . the largest opposition party , the pcrm , holds 34 seats . new parliamentary elections are expected in november 2014 . according to the world bank , moldova's per capita gross national income of $1,980 in 2011 makes it the poorest country in europe . more than one - fifth of the country's population lives in poverty . more than one - quarter of moldova's economically active population works abroad . remittances from those working abroad amounted to 20% of the country's gross domestic product in 2011 , according to the economist intelligence unit . moldova's main natural resource is its rich soil . agriculture , especially fruit , wine , and tobacco , plays an important role in moldova's economy . in 2011 , agriculture accounted for 12% of gdp , 41% of exports , and 28% of employment in moldova . most of moldova's industry is located in the breakaway transnistria region . transnistria's economy has also suffered as a result of the global economic crisis , resulting in large - scale emigration . transnistria's economy is dependent on remittances from transnistrians working abroad and on aid from russia , including direct aid and indirect subsidies in the form of unpaid debts for energy supplies . the global financial crisis had a negative impact on moldova . the leu , moldova's currency , weakened and remains under pressure . remittances dropped , as moldovan emigrants lost jobs in other hard - hit countries . foreign direct investment also dropped sharply . moldova's gdp dropped by 6% in 2009 , but rebounded to grow by 6.9% in 2010 and 6.5% in 2011 . however , gdp contracted by 0.8% in 2012 , due to the slowdown in the eurozone . in 2013 , moldova's gdp grew by a rapid 8.9% , spurred by strong consumer spending and a good agricultural harvest , as compared to a drought the previous year . the weakening moldovan currency has also boosted exports . growth in 2014 may be affected somewhat by the unstable situation in neighboring ukraine and a possible slowdown in russia due to the threat of sanctions against that country .