seq. ) applies to cuban nationals to the extent necessary to give effect to their rights under treaties or reciprocity relating to trade or commercial names or repression of unfair competition ; clarify that a manufacturer or distributor of spirits outside the united states who uses a mark or geographical indication for such spirits shall be considered damaged by a mark or geographical indication used by a competitor which deceptively indicates a place of origin other than the actual origin of the spirits ; and authorize u.s. courts to recognize and enforce the rights of a cuban national in a trademark or trade name based on common law or the trademark act of 1946 . in order to ensure that trademarks owned by u.s. nationals will be adequately protected in cuba , h.r . 2494 and s. 2002 provide for a registry of trademarks owned by u.s. nationals and registered in or submitted for registration in cuba on or after january 1 , 1959 . the president will direct the secretary of state to negotiate with cuba to assure that it will comply with international intellectual property agreements . it has been reported that house and senate conferees considered including amendments to § 211 in h.r . 1588 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 , which became p.l . 108-136 , however , no such amendment was included . reportedly , bacardi circulated a proposal to delete all references to "designated national" and its definition and to apply § 211 only to those who knew or had reason to know that a trademark was confiscated , but opponents of § 211 argued that any action less than a complete repeal would leave the united states open to further challenge by cuba under the inter - american convention for trademark and commercial protection . both the european union and cuba have expressed concern about the lack of progress in u.s. compliance with the dsb's recommendations at regular meetings of the dsb . the european union asked in particular for clarification concerning the u.s. position on abandoned trademarks or trade names , noting that despite representations by the united states to the dsb panel that § 211 does not apply to abandoned trademarks , the u.s. courts have held otherwise , since the trademark "havana club" had apparently been abandoned upon the failure of the original owner to pay the required maintenance fee in 1973 . the european union has repeatedly asserted that the panel had relied on non - application to abandoned trademarks in reaching the conclusion that certain clauses of § 211 were consistent with the trips . at the meeting on may 7 , 2003 , the united states replied that the panel decision did not relate to the issue of abandonment and that no u.s. court decision had been issued since the "havana club" litigation and the dbs panel decision .