the reconfiguration was completed by august . on november 21 , the u.n. security council passed resolution 1785 that further extended eufor's and nato's mandates in bosnia for another year . on december 10 , the eu welcomed the successful reconfiguration of eufor and agreed to retain a military presence in bosnia for as long as was necessary . germany and italy lead troop contributions ; the u.k. withdrew most of its contingent in 2007 . about 1,500 u.s. troops currently serve in the nato peacekeeping force in nearby kosovo . the december 2004 handover ceremony marked an important milestone both for bosnia's future and for the eu's aspirations to assume greater security responsibilities . eufor is seen as an important precedent for future potential mission handovers from nato to the eu , for example possibly in kosovo ( although peacekeeping functions there remain with nato ) . eu members have sustained their support for contributing to a safe and secure environment in bosnia , even while the emphasis has shifted from a large military presence to greater political engagement . outside of bosnia but within the region , tensions may increase in conjunction with the anticipated resolution of kosovo's disputed status in 2008 . on april 26 , 2004 , eu members endorsed a "general concept" for an eu - led mission in bosnia , including a military component of about 7,000 troops . the concept established the broad strategy for the eu's engagement in bosnia . it called for the eu military operation to fulfill the military tasks of the dayton peace agreement , have a mandate authorized by the u.n. security council under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , and come under the political authority of the eu council's political and security committee ( psc ) . at its june 28-29 istanbul summit , nato nations confirmed the decision to conclude sfor by the end of 2004 and agreed that nato's residual military presence would have the "principal task" of providing advice on defense reforms and would also "undertake certain operational supporting tasks , such as counter - terrorism... ; supporting the icty...with regard to the detention of persons indicted for war crimes ; and intelligence sharing with the eu. on july 9 , the u.n. security council unanimously passed resolution 1551 which welcomed "the eu's intention to launch an eu mission to bosnia and herzegovina , including a military component , from december 2004. . on july 12 , eu members adopted a "joint action" on the eu military operation in bosnia , named althea . it designated the eu operation commander and eu force commander and reaffirmed the eu's comprehensive approach toward bosnia and support for eu integration . on october 11 , the eu council approved the operational plan for the eufor operation althea . the u.n. security council passed resolution 1575 on november 22 . acting under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , it authorized eufor to be the legal successor to sfor and to carry out a peace stabilization role for an initial period of one year . at a ceremony in sarajevo on december 2 , nato formally concluded the sfor mission and the eu launched operation althea .