no further action was taken . similar legislation , h.r . 125 , was introduced in the 108 th congress . it proposed to rename the technology assessment act of 1972 as the office of technology assessment reestablishment act of 2003 and to authorize ota appropriations at $20 million annually for fy2004 to fy2009 . the bill was referred to the house science committee . representative holt sought , in 2002 , to introduce an amendment to h.r . 5121 , the legislative branch appropriations act fy2003 , to provide $4 million to fund ota for fy2003 . he made a similar attempt in 2003 to amend the fy2004 legislative branch appropriations bill , h.r . 2657 , to fund ota at $7 million . both times the rules committee ruled the amendment not in order . since 2001 proposals have been made to create an ota - like office in the legislative branch to provide technology assessment - related support . congress has directed gao to conduct technology assessments on a pilot basis ; legislation was introduced to make the program permanent or to authorize an assessment office in gao . the following issues could be considered when evaluating alternative technology assessment proposals: ( 1 ) analysis of the need for more technology assessment information and advice ; ( 2 ) evidence of political support for enhancing legislative capabilities for technology assessment ; ( 3 ) with respect to augmenting gao's "core capability" to conduct technology assessment , the availability of funds , the timing , and the utility of gao's technology assessments for congressional decisionmaking , and the pros and cons of locating a large assessment center within gao , including its impact on other gao functions , including auditing and evaluation activities ; and ( 4 ) the potential benefits and costs of establishing a more independent legislative technology assessment function , such as in a separate ota - like support activity or in an existing congressional support agency . its archived reports are available via the internet at http: / / www.wws.princeton.edu / ~ota / . several reasons were given for terminating ota's funding and numerous studies have been written about the rise and fall of the agency . critics of ota cited such factors as difficulty in completing reports in time to meet congressional schedules , lack of utility to congressional decisionmaking , alleged bias toward "liberal" solutions , or partisan politics . some say that congress can turn to and fund studies by the national academies , composed of the national academy of sciences ( nas ) , the national academy of engineering , the institute of medicine , and the national research council ( nrc ) , or utilize the services of gao and the congressional research service ( crs ) for information and analysis on science and technology issues . others disagree and cite the utility of ota studies to decisionmaking and the need for congress to maintain its own support agency devoted to assessing technology . some former ota staff members and science policy analysts have called for resumption of funding for ota or creation of a legislative organization to perform ota - like functions or to contract with outside groups to perform such functions .