through may 2004 , 5,331 individuals had been screened . of that total , 1,954 individuals were from their target population ( children under the age of six , and pregnant and nursing women ) . ( the system is not required to pay for sample collection or analysis. ) if a water system still exceeds the action level after installing optimal corrosion control treatment and source water treatment , it must replace annually 7% of the lead service lines under its ownership . the water system must offer to replace the privately owned portion of a service line ( at the owner's expense ) . the safe drinking water act allows epa to delegate primary enforcement authority ( primacy ) for the public water system supervision ( pwss ) program to states . states that have primacy oversee water systems and their compliance with federal drinking water regulations . epa , wasa , and other local officials worked with the corps of engineers to determine the cause of the elevated levels . it appears that changes in treatment processes at the washington aqueduct made the water more corrosive , causing more lead to leach from lead pipes in the distribution system and from lead plumbing inside homes . in november 2000 , the corps had changed its secondary disinfection treatment from free chlorine to chloramines to comply with a new epa regulation that placed strict limits on disinfection byproducts . after that , more than 10% of tap water samples taken by wasa exceeded the action level . as a result of this finding , the corps of engineers worked with a technical work group to develop a new corrosion control process . this commonly used compound is expected to form a protective coating in pipes and reduce lead leaching . in august , epa approved use of the process for the entire aqueduct service area and imposed supplemental monitoring and reporting requirements on the affected public water systems . epa determined that wasa had failed to comply with numerous sampling , public notification , and reporting requirements contained in the lead rule . epa and wasa reached a consent agreement requiring wasa to improve its public education program , upgrade its database management systems , and replace more than 1,600 lead service lines . in response to high lead levels in washington , dc tap water , the dc department of health ( doh ) and the u.s. public health service offered blood testing for residents . within that population , 40 children ( 2.2% ) had elevated lead levels ( i.e. , 10 μg / dl or higher ) ; 26 lived in homes without lead service lines . all except one of the homes of the children with elevated blood lead levels were found to have dust and / or soil lead levels that exceed federal guidelines . also , a recent cdc analysis of blood lead levels among dc residents found an overall decline in blood lead levels since 1998 . none of the 201 persons tested who live in homes with the highest levels of lead in drinking water ( i.e. , above 300 ppb ) had blood lead levels above cdc's levels of concern .