morocco and algeria are regional rivals . the united states and morocco continue to share an interest in promoting stability and pursuing economic and security cooperation amid ongoing regional tumult . morocco's role in counterterrorism and regional security is likely to remain of interest to members of congress , as is the bilateral trade and investment relationship . congressional efforts to use foreign aid appropriations legislation to prompt the executive branch to change its policy toward the disputed territory of western sahara have gained in prominence in recent years . some members have also continued to focus on the degree to which u.s. policy toward morocco includes the encouragement of human rights and democracy . the role of moroccan islamist political parties and movements may also be of congressional interest in the context of regional developments . the stalemate appears likely to endure . morocco's foreign policy focuses on its western partners , the middle east , and sub - saharan africa . in addition to morocco's foreign minister , salaheddine mezouar , who is from the rni party , the king and his royal advisors play a key role in foreign policy ; they have prioritized close ties with the west while prime minister benkirane has occasionally publicly criticized western policies . the european union ( eu ) is morocco's top trading partner and provides considerable aid . european leaders appear to hope that morocco's stability will be preserved amid regional upheaval . they also seek moroccan cooperation to stem illegal immigration and drug trafficking via morocco to europe . morocco's eu association agreement entered into force in 2000 , and a 2012 trade agreement expanded the duty - free treatment of agricultural , food , and fisheries products on both sides . a new fishing agreement that includes european access to the coastline of disputed western sahara was ratified in 2014 , after a hiatus ; the previous agreement was discontinued in 2011 due to some eu parliamentarians' objections to conditions in moroccan - administered western sahara , as well as environmental and economic concerns . diplomatic , commercial , and military ties with former colonial powers france and spain are extensive , and both countries have large immigrant populations of moroccan origin . frictions with france nonetheless arose in 2014 over allegations by france - based moroccan activists of torture in morocco ; statements critical of morocco that were attributed in the press to a senior french diplomat ; and , possibly , france's recent cultivation of closer ties with algeria . after the january 2015 terrorist attacks in france , foreign minister mezouar declined to attend france's multinational rally against extremism due to the presence of "blasphemous caricatures of the prophet. spain , for its part , possesses two territorial enclaves on morocco's mediterranean coast , ceuta and melilla , which morocco claims , sometimes causing bilateral tensions . the neighbors also have an unresolved dispute concerning territorial waters between morocco and the spanish canary islands in the atlantic ocean . still , territorial disputes and occasional criticism by spanish politicians of morocco's stance on western sahara appear secondary to economic , security , and law enforcement cooperation .