b . withheld to avoid disclosing individual firm data . the rendering process . in most systems , raw materials are ground to a uniformsize and placed in continuous cookers or in batch cookers , which evaporate moisture and free fat from protein andbone . a series ofconveyers , presses , and a centrifuge continue the process of separating fat from solids . the finished fat ( eg , tallow,lard , yellowgrease ) goes into separate tanks , and the solid protein ( eg , mbm , bone meal , poultry meal ) is pressed into cakefor processing intofeed . ( 5 ) other rendering systems are used , includingthose that recover protein solids from slaughterhouse blood or that process usedrestaurant grease . this restaurant grease generally is recovered ( often in 55-gallon drums ) for use as yellow greasein non - humanfood products like animal feeds . value and use of rendered products . the 18 billion pounds of ingredients thatrenderers produce each year have been valued at more than $3 billion , of which $870 million is exported . of the18 billion poundtotal , 10 billion pounds were feed ingredients with a value of approximately $1 billion ( sparks 2001 ) . mbmaccounted for 6.6 billionpounds of this , poultry byproducts 4 billion pounds , and blood meal 226 million pounds ( sparks ) . ( 6 ) such ingredients are valued fortheir nutrients - - high protein content , digestible amino acids , and minerals - - and their relatively low cost . poultryoperations andpet food manufacturers accounted for 66% of the domestic mbm market of nearly 5.7 billion pounds in 2000 , whilehog and cattleoperations took most of the rest . number and types of rendering plants . one study estimated that 137 firmsoperated 240 plants in 1997 , with a total payroll of nearly 10,000 employees . ( 4 ) more recently , the national renderers association ( nra ) estimated that canada and the united states have a combined 250-260 rendering plants . rendering facilitiesmay be eitherintegrated or independent operations . integrated plants operate in conjunction with animal slaughter and meat processing plants and handle 65% - 70% of all renderedmaterial . almost all of the resultingingredients are destinedfor nonhuman consumption ( eg , animal feeds , industrial products ) . the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates animalfeed ingredients , but its continuous presence in rendering plants , or in feed mills that buy rendered ingredients , isnot a legalrequirement . so long as animals are raised and processed for food , vast amounts of inedible materials will be generated , the result of prematuredeaths , herd culls , and slaughter byproducts . "regardless of quantity , byproducts and rendered products from theslaughter processmust be sold at whatever price will clear the market or the industry ( and the environment ) incurs a cost fordisposal. ( 7 ) asgovernment rules and industry practices evolve to address food safety and animal disease concerns like bse , optionsfor using thesebyproducts may become more limited . if animal byproducts have fewer market outlets , new questions may ariseabout how todispose of them safely and who should pay . "feed ban" impacts .