objectives . nepad seeks to spur economic growth and improvesocio - economic development across africaby increasing capital flows to africa in the form of private sector investment , development assistance , debt relief,and broadened market access for africanexports . a key nepad aim is improving the institutional , regulatory , and planning capabilities of african statesto allow them to achieve gains both asindividual entities and as economically integrated sub - regional groupings . nepad seeks to increase democraticdecision making , transparency , andaccountability in governance ; improve economic policy - making and public sector management ; and increaseinvestments in infrastructure . other goals includeexpanding access to social services and education ; eradicating poverty ; and promoting peace , security , and humanrights . sectoral investment targets includeagriculture , energy , environment , physical and communications infrastructure , and institutional efforts to increaseeconomic diversification and trade . economic integration . nepad endeavors both to strengthen linkages among african countries , and todeepen and accelerate africa's economic and political integration with other world regions . a key aim is to ensurethat africa surmounts what one nepad textasserts is the significant degree of africa's marginalization in the face of increasingly interconnected global tradeand markets . at the same time , nepad seeksto buffer africa from the perceived negative effects of "globalization" on public health , local industries , theenvironment , and public safety . some nepad critics assert that increased african economic integration with global markets may yield significant unanticipated problems , such as increasedexternal pressure to adhere to trade rules and regulatory frameworks defined by market forces and policy makersoutside of africa . some critics fear that rates ofnatural resource extraction in africa , possibly accompanied by increased rates of environmental degradation , maygrow . they also argue that as greaterintegration takes place , africa's relative lack of industrial capacity will prevent it from taking advantage of potentialearnings opportunities generated byvalue - added secondary processing of export commodities , which typically takes place in importing countries . criticsalso maintain that weak prices for manykey african exports may make it vulnerable to exploitation by powerful global economic actors , while global labormarkets may drain africa of much of itseducated work force . governance and reform . nepad aims at promoting good governance , democratization , and public sectorreforms as primary means of attracting greater foreign investment , political support , and aid flows to africa . themain nepad document posits these ends asnecessary pre - requisites for socio - economic policy success , long - term political stability , and social justice . it callsfor market - oriented economic and governancereforms that substantially mirror those advocated by multi - lateral lenders and western donor governments . nepadrequires , however , that these policies beimplemented and monitored by african states themselves - - not by foreign actors . a new nepad institution , theafrican peer review mechanism ( aprm,discussed below ) , has been described as a primary means of implementing nepad's governance goals . organizational structure and linkages . nepad , a term used interchangeably to refer both to the keynepad policy document and to the governments and organizations that support it , is a major policy vehicle forafrican union ( au ) .