all four diasporaseats went to the hdz . the social democrats came in second , but combined with their four previous coalitionpartners also cameup short of a majority . initial analyses of the election results proclaimed croatia's shift to the right , and the dramatic gain in support for the hdz aloneappears to support this claim . however , many observers believe that the rightward shift resulted more from theelectorate's generic desire for change and a sense of frustration with the disparate incumbent leaders than from nostalgia for theproblematic tudjmanera . the racan government's strategic goals for croatia - including full integration into euro - atlantic institutions - continue to behighly popular in croatia , and sanader closely echoed these goals in the hdz platform . moreover , the margin ofdifference in votersupport between the right and left remains small , with the left hurt considerably by its own infighting andfragmentation . after the vote , the hdz reached out to other parties to try to form a majority coalition . top partner prospects appeared to be thepeasant party ( hss ) , part of the outgoing coalition , and the right - wing party of rights ( hsp ) . some peasant partyleaders appearedto favor a coalition , but the party as a whole did not approve such a move . european union representativesexpressed strongopposition to the possible inclusion of the hsp in croatia's government because of the party's extreme nationalisticreputation . hspleaders , who insist that their party has reformed , have said they would remain in opposition . instead the hdzresorted to solicitingsupport from various small parties including the social liberal / democratic center ( hsls / dc ) coalition and thepensioners party . the hdz also gained support from a handful of national minority deputies , including the serb democraticindependent party ( sdss ) . in december , prime minister - designate sanader announced that he had secured enough votes to support a minority government . ondecember 23 , he presented to parliament his cabinet and outlined the government's policy priorities , mainly relatingto economicreforms . sanader's lack of sufficient coalition partners to secure a stable parliamentary majority will leave thehdz - led governmentdependent on its cooperation agreements with parties outside of government . the return of the hdz to power after the 2003 elections has prompted some speculation about the sanader government's possibleareas of continuity or change from the last government . hdz leaders wish to distinguish the party from , rather thanharken , itslegacy in government in the 1990s . some sloveneleaders have threatened to block croatia's eu aspirations if this issue is not resolved , once slovenia joins the euin 2004 . the previous croatian government promoted closer regional ties in the security arena . at the prague nato summit in november2002 , the presidents of albania , croatia , and macedonia proposed to president bush the creation of a u.s. - adriaticcharter,modeled after the u.s. - baltic charter ( established in 1998 ) . the adriatic charter initiative aims to deepen regionalcooperation,promote reforms , and improve the collective integration prospects of the three countries . secretary of state powelland the foreignministers of the three countries signed the charter on may 2 , 2003 , in albania .