serbian cooperation then decreased significantly . the democratic party of president boris tadic and the g17 plus party see icty cooperation as a more important priority than the nationalist democratic party of serbia , led by prime minister vojislav kostunica . 5522 reported by the senate appropriations committee conditions aid to serbia's central government on icty cooperation by may 31 , 2007 , "including access for investigators , the provision of documents , timely information on the location , travel , and sources of financial support of indictees , including radovan karadic , and the surrender and transfer of indictees or assistance in their apprehension , including ratko mladic. unlike the house version , the section retains a specific mention of karadzic but appears to soften it by tacitly acknowledging that mladic might be easier for serbian authorities to apprehend than karadzic . the 109 th congress did not complete an fy2007 foreign aid bill before it adjourned . fy2007 foreign operations were funded through february 15 , 2007 by a continuing resolution ( p.l . 109-383 ) and then through the rest of the fiscal year by another continuing resolution ( p.l . however , the terms of the continuing resolution carried forward the fy2006 serbia aid conditions through fy2007 . on july 3 , 2007 , the administration certified that serbia had met the aid conditions in the legislation , and released $6 million in aid that had previously been suspended . in justifying the move , the administration pointed to the june 2007 arrest and transfer to the tribunal of zdravko tolimir and vlastimir djordjevic , two serb suspects wanted by the icty . at present , four icty suspects , all serbs , are still at large , including the two most important ones , karadzic and mladic . division j of the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-161 ) includes fy2008 foreign aid appropriations . section 699d permits u.s. aid to serbia after may 31 , 2008 if serbia meets certain conditions . the section also says that the administration "should" vote for loans and assistance for serbia in international financial institutions after this deadline if it meets the aid conditions . the most important condition , as in past years , is "cooperating with the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia including access for investigators , the provision of documents , timely information on the location , movement , and sources of financial support of indictees , and the surrender and transfer of indictees or assistance in their apprehension , including ratko mladic and radovan karadzic. two other conditions , also part of the aid conditions in previous years , are also included . they are "taking steps that are consistent with the dayton accords to end serbian financial , political , security and other support which has served to maintain separate republika srpska institutions" and "taking steps to implement policies which reflect a respect for minority rights and the rule of law. these latter two conditions have not been invoked to deny aid to serbia in recent years . as in past years , the provision exempts humanitarian aid , assistance to promote democracy , and aid to kosovo from the conditions laid down in this section .