all payments are reduced by sequestration . , between 7.5% and 15% ) exceed the available $15 million , then payments would be proportionally reduced . nap is not subject to annual appropriations . instead , it receives such sums as are necessary through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) , which has a line of credit with the u.s. treasury to fund an array of farm programs . eligible crops under nap include any commercial crops grown for food , fiber , or livestock consumption for which there is no cat coverage available under the federal crop insurance program , with limited exceptions . these crops include mushrooms , floriculture , ornamental nursery , christmas trees , turfgrass sod , aquaculture , honey , maple sap , ginseng , and industrial crops used in manufacturing or grown as a feedstock for energy production , among others . trees grown for wood , paper , or pulp products are not eligible . to be eligible for a nap payment , a producer first must apply for coverage by the application closing date , which varies by crop but is generally about 30 days prior to the final planting date for an annual crop . like cat coverage under crop insurance , nap applicants must also pay an administrative fee at the time of application . the nap service fee is the lesser of $325 per crop or $825 per producer per administrative county , not to exceed a total of $1,950 for farms in multiple counties . in order to receive a nap payment , a producer must experience at least a 50% crop loss caused by a natural disaster or be prevented from planting more than 35% of intended crop acreage . for any losses in excess of the minimum loss threshold , a producer can receive 55% of the average market price for the covered commodity . hence , nap is similar to cat coverage in that it pays 55% of the market price for losses in excess of 50% of normal historical production . a qualified applicant can then borrow up to 100% of actual production or physical losses ( not to exceed $500,000 ) . once a county is declared eligible , an individual producer within the county ( or a contiguous county ) must also meet the following requirements for an em loan: a producer must ( 1 ) be an established family farmer and a citizen or permanent resident of the united states ; ( 2 ) experience a crop loss of more than 30% or a physical loss of livestock , livestock products , real estate , or property ; and ( 3 ) be unable to obtain credit from a commercial lender but still show the potential to repay the loan , including having acceptable credit history and collateral to secure the loan . applications must be received within eight months of the county's disaster designation date . loans for nonreal - estate purposes must generally be repaid within seven years . loans for physical losses to real estate have terms up to 20 years .