some of these changes had been previously suggested in other past measures . the employer may decline unfavorable proposals with the hope that the union may change its position to avert a strike . if binding arbitration was required , the employer would lose that bargaining leverage . the efca would have amended the nlra to impose new penalties for specified existing unfair labor practices . moreover , the nlra does not provide for the use of binding arbitration to resolve disputes . proponents of the efca have argued that legislation is needed to promote the prompt negotiation of initial collective bargaining agreements . in 32 percent of all cases , the employer and the union reportedly fail to reach agreement within the first two years following an election . some have observed , however , that the availability of binding arbitration under the efca discouraged support for the legislation from the business community . under the act , employers would have been faced with the possibility of having to accept what could have been viewed as unfavorable terms and conditions by the arbitration board . under existing law , the employer does not have to accept such terms and conditions . for example , if the board found that an employer discriminated against an employee with respect to his hiring , tenure , or any term or condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in a labor organization either while employees of the employer were seeking representation by a labor organization or during the period after a labor organization was recognized as a unit's exclusive representative , but before the first collective bargaining agreement was executed , the board would have been permitted to award employee back pay and 2 times that amount as liquidated damages . the efca would have also imposed a civil penalty for certain willful and repeated unfair labor practices . any employer who willfully and repeatedly ( a ) interferes with , restrains , or coerces an employee in the exercise of his right to organize , or ( b ) discriminates against an employee with respect to his hiring , tenure , or any term or condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in a labor organization either while employees of the employer were seeking representation by a labor organization or during the period after a labor organization had been recognized as a unit's exclusive representative , but before the first collective bargaining agreement has been executed , would have been subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $20,000 for each violation . the exact amount of the penalty would have been determined by the board based on the gravity of the unfair labor practice and its impact on the charging party , on others seeking to exercise rights guaranteed by the nlra , or on the public interest . under existing law , the board may order any person committing an unfair labor practice to cease and desist from such misconduct . the board may also take such affirmative action , including reinstatement with back pay , as will effectuate the policies of the nlra .