section 220 of the fy2001 defense authorization act ( h.r . 106-398 of october 30 , 2000 ) states , "it shall be a goal of the armed forces to achieve the fielding of unmanned , remotely controlled technology such that — ( 1 ) by 2010 , one - third of the aircraft in the operational deep strike force aircraft fleet are unmanned ; and ( 2 ) by 2015 , one - third of the operational ground combat vehicles are unmanned. a 2005 report by the naval studies board ( nsb ) recommended that the navy and marine corps should accelerate the introduction of uavs , and uuvs , ugvs ; the report made several additional recommendations concerning don uv efforts . potential issues for congress regarding naval uvs include the following: what implications might uvs have for required numbers and characteristics of naval ships and manned aircraft , and naval concepts of operations ? since the current navy ucav and gladiator ugv programs will likely fall far short of meeting the goals established by section 220 of p.l . 106-398 , should the these programs be accelerated so as to come closer to meeting the goals , or should the goals in section 220 be amended ? unmanned vehicles ( uvs ) are viewed as a key component of u.s. defense transformation . perhaps uniquely among the military departments , the department of the navy ( don ) , which includes the navy and marine corps , may eventually acquire every major kind of uv , including unmanned air systems ( uass ) — which include unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) and armed uavs known as unmanned combat air vehicles , or ucavs — unmanned surface vehicles ( usvs ) , unmanned underwater vehicles ( uuvs ) and autonomous underwater vehicles ( auvs ) , and unmanned ground vehicles ( ugvs ) . is the marine corps' plan for using upgraded pioneers as an interim tactical uav the best approach ? the department of the navy's proposed fy2008 budget , with funding for various navy and marine corps uv programs , was submitted to congress in february 2007 . how will the restructuring of the j - ucas program into the navy - oriented ucav program affect the navy ucav effort ? are the marine corps' uav and ugv programs adequately coordinated with those of the army ?