extension of compulsory copyright license . the compulsory copyright license was the chief impetus behind consideration ofshvera because it was due to expire on december 31 , 2004 . ( 8 ) certain satellite subscribers ( see bulleted list above ) would lose access to distant network signalsif the license was notextended . copyright owners , often represented by the motion picture association of america ( mpaa ) , object tothe compulsory licenses . they argue that the cable and satellitecompanies should be required to negotiate copyright royalties like everyone else . prices for the cable and satellitecompulsory licenses are set by different methods and on differentcycles . prices for the satellite license had last been set in 1997 . as required by law , the copyright office , througha copyright arbitration royalty panel ( carp ) , set a price based on"fair market value": 27 cents per subscriber per year for both distant network and superstation signals . the satellitecompanies objected because the prices were a significant increase,and much higher than what cable companies pay ( see crs report 98-140 ( pdf ) ) . in shvia , congress rolled the ratesback by 45% for distant network signals , and 30% for superstationsignals . the mpaa argued that if the distant network signal license was extended , the royalty rates should be substantially increased and adjusted annually . thatfinal version was a compromise between h.r . 4518 , which passed the house on october 6 , 2004 , and legislation that was pending in the senate . 4518 ( l. smith ) had been reported from the house judiciarycommittee ( h.rept . 108-660 ) on september 7 , 2004 . as passed , it incorporated many of the provisions of h.r . 4501 ( upton ) , which was reported from the house energyand commerce committee on july 22 ( h.rept . in the senate , s. 2013 ( hatch ) was reported,amended , from senate judiciary ( no written report ) on june 17 , and s. 2644 ( ensign / mccain ) was reported , amended , from the senate commerce committee ( s.rept . 108-427 ) on december 7 . neither bill reached the senate floor . the copyright office wanted paritybetween the cable and satellite licenses and recommended that the satellite distant network signal license be renewedfor five more years while both licenses were reexamined . thesatellite broadcasting and communications association ( sbca ) , representing the dbs companies , wanted thedistant network signal license made permanent . to date , white areas ( or unserved households ) have been defined based on the transmission of analogtelevision signals . the broadcast television industry , however , is transitioning from analog to digital signals , andeventually will cease transmitting analog signals ( see crs report rl31260 ) . sbca and the digital transition coalition ( dtc ) want "digital white areas" to be defined , similar tothe existing analog white areas , where satellite companies would beallowed to provide distant digital network signals to subscribers unable to receive local network digital signalsterrestrially . sbca and the dtc argue that allowing satellite tvcompanies to provide digital distant network signals to unserved households would spur the broadcasters to convertto digital more quickly .