- led coalition . ( 16 ) for the bush administration , faced with the worst fighting since the fall of bagdad in april 2003 , and the withdrawal of forces by spain , honduras , and thedominican republic , japan's strong stance has been important to stiffening the resolve of wavering coalitionpartners . the first contingent of spain's 1,300troops withdrew from najaf while u.s. marines were battling the al - mahdi army of the militant shia cleric,muqtada - al - sadr , for control of the city . ( 17 ) someother coalition partners reportedly have been considering withdrawing their forces or not replacing them when theircurrent tour of duty ends . ( 18 ) questions remain about the japanese government's staying power . a basic political weakness of the government's position is that the troops were sent on ahumanitarian and reconstruction mission , and are explicitly forbidden to engage in combat except in self - defense . this also limits their value to the coalition . the sharp upsurge in violence has raised the possibility that japanese troops could be drawn into combat forself - defense , which would jeopardize support fortheir mission . ( 21 ) the opposition dpj hascalled for separating the issue of not yielding to blackmail from the larger question of the legality of puttingtroops in what it says cannot be described as a "non - combat" area , and the purposes served by japanese forces iniraq . ( 22 ) in any event , the dpj can be expectedto make criticism of the iraqi deployment a major theme its campaign for the upper house elections this june . following the release of the hostages and a continued resurgence of economic growth , koizumi's popularity rose sharply . in a mid - april 2004 poll conductedby a major national daily newspaper , some 73% of the respondents said that they wanted koizumi to stay on at leastfor another year , and ldp candidatesscored a clean sweep in three lower house bi - elections on april 26 . ( 23 ) for a number of reasons , however , the ldp's prospects remain clouded . koizumi'sannouncement on april 8 that he will not seek reelection after his current term ends in late 2006 may make it easierfor him to make hard decisions , but will notnecessarily help the ldp . concerns about japan's security and the future of the u.s. - japan alliance would appear to continue to give japan a strong interest in maintaining its troops iniraq . the japanese defense agency already has announced that a replacement contingent of 460 troops was beingreadied for iraq . ( 24 ) on the other hand , thedeteriorating security situation in iraq could still reverse japanese policy , creating new problems for the bushadministration and straining the u.s. - japanalliance . also , despite sending replacement troops there are no indications whether japan will carry out its originalintention to send up to 1,100 troops to iraq . japan's commitment to keeping its forces in iraq could also weaken if the koizumi government were to perceivethat u.s. policy towards north korea nolonger was in accord with japanese interests . koizumi and other senior officials immediately vowed not to give in to the terrorists demands .