the eeoc filed an appeal with the third circuit . meanwhile , the u.s. supreme court decided national cable and telecommunications association v. brand x internet services in 2005 . the justices there ruled that a federal court under the " chevron doctrine" is required to defer to an agency's interpretation of law — even if its differs from the court's own views — if the particular statute is within the agency's administrative authority , if it is ambiguous on the point in contention , and if the agency's interpretation is "reasonable. in other words , the agency's interpretation of a statute is entitled to deference except where a court finds that the law in question is clear and unambiguous , leaving no gaps for the agency decision to fill . in view of brand x , the eeoc moved the district court to reconsider whether prior judicial precedent foreclosed issuance of the proposed rule on retiree health benefits . ultimately , the district court reversed its earlier decision , holding that the eeoc does , indeed , have the authority to issue the challenged regulation . brand x makes it clear that where a court's holding states merely the 'best' interpretation of a statute , not the 'only permissible' interpretation , the court decision does not foreclose a later , differing agency interpretation.... because the third circuit's opinion in erie county did not hold that it was the only permissible interpretation of the adea , it cannot foreclose a contrary interpretation by the eeoc . despite the decision to vacate its earlier judgment , the court left in place the injunction preventing implementation of the proposed eeoc rule pending the outcome of appeals that the parties filed with the third circuit . in 2007 , the third circuit issued its ruling in aarp v. eeoc . although the appellate court affirmed the district court's decision upholding the eeoc's retiree health benefit rule , the third circuit reached its decision on different legal grounds . specifically , the court held that the proposed rule does fall within the eeoc's exemption authority under § 9 . according to the court , because "the power to grant exemptions provides an agency with authority to permit certain actions at variance with the express provisions of the statute in question ... congress made plain its intent to allow limited practices not otherwise permitted under the statute , so long as they are 'reasonable' and 'necessary and proper in the public interest.' finding that the retiree health benefit rule was a reasonable , necessary , and proper exercise of the eeoc's exemption authority under the adea , the court upheld the rule and lifted the injunction , allowing the final regulations to become effective on december 26 , 2007 , when the eeoc published them in the federal register . although the american association of retired persons ( aarp ) filed a petition with the supreme court requesting review of the third circuit's decision , the court recently declined to review the case . the eeoc's final rule contains a narrowly drawn exemption from the adea to permit the practice of coordinating employer - provided retiree health coverage with eligibility for medicare .