each is well attended . the educational sessions available range from legislative procedures , both in committee and on the floor , to how to hire a staff , and how to construct an office budget . they cover the broad range of current issues from defense to the environment to agriculture , from the specifics of a particular weapons system to the best method of reducing the federal deficit . they are taught by current members , former members , government practitioners , and academic experts . they focus on the substance of issues , previous attempts at legislative changes , the administration's position , and the outlook for action in the current congress . numerous interest groups provide information for consideration , as does the party leadership . the organizational sessions serve as the first introduction to congress and to each other for the new members and attest to the value and intent of the early meetings envisioned in 1974 . accordingly , before the end of the year , class officers are elected , party leaders selected , and chamber officers , such as the chaplain , chosen . regional representatives to steering and policy committees , designees to the committees on committees , and other party officials are named . chairmen of selected committees are elected and members of those committees are often chosen . each of these actions is then subject only to official ratification at the start of the congress . room selection drawings and room assignments are also accomplished during these sessions . each january of a recent odd - numbered year , congress has begun work earlier than it used to . both chambers immediately make remaining committee assignments , while committees hold their organizational sessions to establish subcommittees , make subcommittee assignments , hire staff , and adopt committee rules . accordingly , when the scores of measures introduced on the first day are referred to committee , congress is ready to get to work on its legislative agenda without having to spend time on organizational and administrative matters . both groups are expected to attend . in the past four decades , these meetings have become more formalized , more comprehensive , more valued , and more necessary . the senate followed suit soon thereafter . speaker carl albert and minority leader gerald ford agreed that during the transition time between congresses , preparation for the next congress would be of invaluable help in reducing the organizational and legislative congestion that normally accompanies the start of a congress . prior to the convening of a new congress ( somewhere between november 13 and december 20 of any even - numbered year ) , democratic party caucuses or republican party conferences may be called by the majority and minority leaders after consultation with the speaker . if done , the business is , among other things , to choose party leaders , committee leaders , and committee members . as well , members can pick up political tips , technical and administrative lessons , policy facts , figures and interpretations , and a sense of the informal "rules of the game.