1 mine . a fourth bill ( h.r . 4854 ) was essentially a companion bill to h.r . 524 ; it would prohibit epa from issuing preemptive vetoes , before the corps has rendered a permit decision . epa recently initiated administrative steps to preemptively veto a copper mine site in alaska , the pebble deposit , but has not reached a final decision to do so ; h.r . 4854 was considered a response to epa's pending actions in that case . the house transportation and infrastructure committee approved h.r . 524 in april 2014 and approved h.r . 4854 in july 2014 . no further action occurred . in the 114 th congress , bills were introduced seeking to clarify or restrict epa's 404 ( c ) veto authority , including limiting vetoes to up to the time of permit issuance by the corps ( i.e. , bar retroactive vetoes ) . these bills were s. 55 / s. 234 , h.r . the house transportation subcommittee on water resources and environment held oversight hearings on these issues in 2011 , and the house oversight and government reform subcommittee on regulatory affairs held similar hearings in 2011 and 2012 . osm's efforts to revise the 2008 stream buffer zone rule also have been controversial . the house natural resources committee held a number of hearings since the 112 th congress to air concerns that the expected rewrite of the rule would have harmful job impacts on surface coal mining . committee leaders criticized osm's lengthy efforts to revise the 2008 rule as costly and wasteful . in 2014 , the house passed legislation ( h.r . 2824 ) to limit the authority of the secretary of the interior to issue a revised rule for at least five years and to require states to implement the 2008 stream buffer zone rule — now withdrawn by osm — thus seeking to preempt any states that have adopted separate stream buffer protection requirements . legislation in the 114 th congress , h.r . 1644 / s. 1458 , would prevent osm from releasing a revised stream buffer rule pending a study by the national research council on economic and scientific data in the rule . the house passed h.r . 1644 in january 2016 , but there was no further action . also in the 114 th congress , legislation intended to put a partial moratorium on mountaintop removal mining , pending health effects studies , was introduced ( h.r . this bill would require the department of health and human services to investigate links between mountaintop removal mining and human health impacts . until completion of such research and a determination that mountaintop removal mining does not present health risk to residents in nearby communities , there would be a moratorium on new mountaintop removal mining permits issued by the corps , epa , or the secretary of the interior , as well as expansion of existing permits . similar legislation was introduced in the 113 th congress . the obama administration did not present formal views on legislation in the 114 th congress that would have affected cwa permitting or smcra , but the administration did issue a statement of opposition to one appropriations bill , h.r .