libya's decision likely rested on several factors . the burden of 30 years of economic sanctions had significantly limited oil exports and stagnated the libyan economy , making the prospect of renewed international investment that would follow a renunciation of wmd very attractive . further , libya's elimination of its wmd programs was a necessary condition for normalizing relations with the united states . the administration has attributed libya's decision to abandon its wmd to president bush's national security strategy . some officials claim that iraq's example convinced libya to renounce wmd ; others point specifically to the interdiction of centrifuge parts ( used for uranium enrichment ) in october 2003 . president bush also rescinded the national emergency with respect to libya and lifted trade , travel , and commercial restrictions . in september 2004 , libya , the united states , and the uk established the trilateral steering and cooperation committee ( tscc ) to oversee the final stages of elimination of libya's wmd and mtcr - class missile programs and to promote cooperation . libya had been subject to one of the strictest u.s. sanctions regimes as a result of its support of international terrorism . libya's cooperation in several areas has allowed sanctions to be lifted . in september 20 , 2004 , president bush made three determinations about libya that would allow lifting certain sanctions pursuant to the arms export control act ( aeca ) and the export - import bank act of 1945 . first , he determined: that libya received nuclear enrichment equipment , material or technology after august 1977 ; that the continued termination of assistance under section 101 of the aeca would have a serious adverse effect on vital u.s. interests ; and that he has received reliable assurances that libya will not acquire or develop nuclear weapons or assist other nations in doing so . second , he determined that libya sought and received design information intended for use in the development or manufacture of a nuclear explosive devices , and that the application of sanctions would have a serious adverse effect on vital u.s. interests , pursuant to section 102 ( b ) of the aeca . third , he determined that , pursuant to section 2 ( b ) ( 4 ) of the export - import bank act of 1945 , it is in the national interest for the export import bank to guarantee , insure , or extend credit , or participate in the extension of credit in support of u.s. exports to libya . further measures included releasing $1.3 billion in frozen assets , providing opic guarantees , and removing restrictions on direct flights between libya and the united states . libya was finally removed from the list of state sponsors of terrorism on june 29 , 2006 . prior to libya's removal from the list of state sponsors of terrorism , u.s. assistance in wmd dismantlement was limited to funding provided by the state department's nonproliferation and disarmament fund ( ndf ) , because such funds are not restricted by limits imposed by other laws .