through withholding ) . this effect could make a rebate less effective than alternative individual tax cuts if it were not for the distributional evidence . however , the distributional effect is more solidly grounded in economic theory , and is based on more concrete and extensive empirical evidence . ( 3 ) certain types of temporary tax cuts are likely to be more effective than permanent ones while , in other cases , they are less effective . both studies rejected the permanent income model ( suggesting some spending effects from a transitory tax cut ) , but larger effects were found for the rate reductions . there are , however , two reservations about comparing these two events to gain insight into the effects of lump - sum tax cuts versus tax cuts reflected in paychecks over time . first , to the extent that individuals use over - withholding as a means of forcing themselves to save , one would not expect spending to rise when the refund is received , even though it might rise when an unplanned rebate is received . thus , finding a smaller amount of spending out of a refund than out of tax cuts reflected in paychecks may not be very meaningful . secondly , the model assumes that individuals were certain that the later phases of the reagan tax cuts would be received . if there was some uncertainty , however , the fact that spending did not increase until the tax cut was actually received may partially reflect not the failure of the permanent income model , but the lack of certainty about receipt of the cut . if a differential does indeed exist , this effect could make the payroll tax cut ( and sales tax holidays ) more effective than a rebate . however , these "lump sum" effects would have to be offset by the distributional effects discussed in proposition i and supported by considerable empirical evidence . for that reason , it would be difficult to conclude that a payroll tax holiday would be more effective than a rebate directed at low - income individuals . in addition , some evidence on the 2001 and 2008 tax rebates suggested that a large fraction of that rebate was spent . evidence on the payroll tax cut in 2011 found a smaller share of that tax cut spent than the rebate , but that difference may reflect methodological and distributional differences or differences in economic conditions . proposition 3 . certain types of temporary tax cuts may be more effective than permanentâ ones . in general , the permanent income modeling of consumption , even when it does not hold in a pure form , suggests that temporary tax cuts will be less effective than permanent ones , presenting something of a dilemma because tax cuts motivated for fiscal policy reasons need to be temporary ( if they are not to hamper long - term growth ) . however , temporary tax cuts that depend on spending ( rather than receiving income ) are likely to be more effective in the short run than permanent ones .