ambassador to el salvador . in september 2012 , both governments celebrated the completion of el salvador's first mcc compact ; a second compact proposal is currently being developed by the salvadoran government . in october 2012 , the united states donated three light helicopters to the salvadoran air force to support efforts against organized crime and to aid in disaster relief . a country's inclusion in the list does not mean that its antidrug efforts are inadequate . however , corruption , a lack of internal controls in law enforcement agencies , and inadequate manpower and equipment continue to hinder bilateral efforts . in 2012 , salvadoran officials seized 327 kilograms of cocaine , 453 kilograms of marijuana , and $2.0 million in illicit cash . both the anti - narcotics division ( dan ) of the pnc and the military achieved fewer "operational results" in 2012 as compared to prior years due to staff turnover and shortages . however , the dan and the salvadoran navy continued to coordinate with their u.s. counterparts . u.s. assistance focused on improving the interdiction capabilities of salvadoran law enforcement and military agencies , particularly the joint military - police task force "grupo cuscatlán," and supporting the attorney general's national electronic monitoring center , an entity for which the u.s. government provided $5 million to establish that opened in 2012 . comalapa international airport in el salvador serves as one of two cooperative security locations ( csls ) for u.s. anti - drug forces in the hemisphere . the csl extends the reach of detection and monitoring aircraft into the eastern pacific drug smuggling corridors . although the u.s. lease on the airport was set to expire in 2010 , el salvador signed an agreement in april 2009 that will allow the united states to continue using comalapa for an additional five years . el salvador is also the home of the u.s. - backed international law enforcement academy ( ilea ) , which provides police management and training to officials from all of the countries of the region . since the mid - 2000s , several u.s. agencies have been actively engaged on the law enforcement and preventive side of dealing with central american gangs ; many u.s. anti - gang efforts in central america have begun in el salvador . in 2004 , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) created an ms - 13 task force to improve information - sharing and intelligence - gathering among u.s. and central american law enforcement officials . the fbi established a vetted transnational anti - gang unit in el salvador in 2007 . the bureau of immigrations and customs enforcement ( ice ) within the department of homeland security created a national anti - gang initiative called "operation community shield" in 2005 . in addition to arresting suspected gang members in the united states , ice began coordinating anti - gang efforts with its office in el salvador and , in collaboration with the fbi , has begun providing detailed criminal history information on gang deportees to salvadoran authorities .