hungary is not contiguous with any othernatostate . slovenia's entry into the alliance would provide hungary with a land bridge to italy , a clear advantage givenneutralaustria's refusal during the kosovo war to permit nato overflights to hungary . slovakia is a credible candidatein somenato capitals , given the return in september 2002 elections of key elements of its reform government . somenortherneuropean allies , such as poland , strongly support membership for the baltic states ; they contend that the baltic stateshavemet osce and eu political guidelines for democracy , and cite the three countries' work to build stability in theregion andto establish better relations with russia . u.s. officials state that the baltic states have made the most progress inmeetingmap requirements , although there is some criticism of how latvia has handled sensitive documents . italy , greece , and turkey are strong supporters of bulgaria's and romania's entry . they contend that these two countriescan contribute to stability in the balkans , where europe's greatest security needs lie . critics counter that romaniaandbulgaria continue to suffer from corruption in their governing structures , and that each must make stronger effortstomodernize its military . bulgaria has also had a succession of governments that have followed an uncertain coursetowardspolitical and economic reform . the views of the russian government play a role in the debate . putin's softer rhetoric against nato enlargement since theseptember 11 terrorist attacks has allayed concerns that his government would strongly oppose enlargement . it ispossiblethat putin now views a unified front against terrorism , in part due to moscow's ongoing conflict in chechnya , asmoreimportant than potential divisions with the allies over enlargement . the duma and much of russia's military andintelligence bureaucracy remain adamantly opposed to enlargement , which they view as a u.s. - led effort to movea militaryalliance closer to their territory . officials from allied states often counter such an argument by underscoring thatenlargement's purpose in large part is to ensure stability in europe , and that the addition of new member statesprovidesstability , and therefore security , to russia's west . putin may also view the entry of estonia and latvia into nato ( and theeu , in 2004 ) as a means to protect russian minorities in those countries , given nato and eu strictures over thetreatmentof ethnic minorities . in the spring of 2003 , both the senate foreign relations committee and the senate armed services committee beganhearings on enlargement . some individual members have expressed their views , and relevant legislation has beenintroduced . the senate foreign relations committee produced a report on enlargement , together with theresolution ofratification ( executive report 108-6 ) , the instrument on which the senate will vote to give its advice and consenttorevision of the north atlantic treaty . in the 107th congress , rep. shimkus and others introduced h.con.res . 116 , which calls for nato invitationsto the baltic states for membership at the 2002 summit , as long as they satisfy the alliance's qualifications . it passedbyvoice vote on october 7 , 2002 . on october 24 , 2001 , legislation was introduced in both houses supporting further enlargement . representative bereuterintroduced h.r . 3167 , the freedom consolidation act of 2001 ; speaker hastert and others cosponsored thebill .