appendix a . background on the election the long - stymied peace process the 2010 presidential election was the main political objective of a peace process aimed at reunifying côte d'ivoire under a series of political - military agreements reached between 2003 and march 2007 , when the most recent accord , the ouagadougou political agreement ( opa ) was signed . the opa incorporated key provisions of the main preceding agreements but superseded them . the election was originally slated to be held as constitutionally prescribed , in a manner that would allow a timely transition to a new elected government at the end of president gbagbo's initial five - year term on october 30 , 2005 . it was delayed at least six times , however , in some cases with the explicit concurrence of the international facilitators of the various peace agreements , and in some cases in spite of their demands , political threats , and other efforts intended to expedite fulfillment of the agreements . these delays enabled gbagbo to maintain his incumbency for five years after the termination of his electoral mandate and — according to some analysts — to significantly influence the politics of the peace process in a manner that allowed him and his key allies to consolidate state power , access to resources , and shape the electoral institutional framework to work in their favor . key accord implementation challenges pertained to the sequence and manner in which disarmament , citizen and voter identification , voter registration , other electoral administration tasks , and various accord - prescribed legal reforms would take place ; and differences over the scope of presidential authority . controversy over these and other issues regularly prompted episodes of political volatility , mass political protests that were , at times , violent , and underpinned electoral process delays which , in turn , spurred the successive series of accords . the root causes underlying the conflict include contention over land ; internal and regional migration ; the nature of national identity ; qualifications for citizenship ; and the extent of foreign influence over ivorian political processes ; security force abuses ; issues of socioeconomic welfare ( eg , power cuts and uneven access to social services ) ; and other aggravating factors , such as corruption and crime . pre - electoral processes: progress and challenges notwithstanding such challenges , the conduct of the october 31 , 2010 , first round election was made possible because substantial headway was made in 2009 and 2010 toward completing opa - required election preparation tasks , despite a number of potentially catastrophic challenges to their execution , and far less progress in attaining key non - electoral but politically critical provisions of the opa . failure to complete the latter — primarily disarmament , demobilization and reintegration of ex - combatants and militia members ; security sector reform ; and the nationwide restoration of state authority , all of which remained incomplete by polling day , notwithstanding much progress — could well have once again prevented the elections from occurring ( see text box ) .