table 1 . provisions from the agoa acceleration act of 200 . regulatory and market standards . manycountries have been slow to utilize agoa at all . others , such as mali , rwanda , and senegal , have implementedagoa - related projects , but have madeinsignificant gains thus far . in addition to lack of market access , there are substantial obstacles to increased exportgrowth in africa . key impediments includeinsufficient domestic markets , lack of investment capital , and poor transportation and power infrastructures . othersignificant challenges include low levels ofhealth and education , protectionist trade policies in africa , and the high cost of doing business in africa due tocorruption and inefficient governmentregulation . furthermore , the apparel industry in africa now faces a challenge in the dismantled multifibrearrangement quota regime , which ended as ofjanuary 1 , 2005 . as a result , africa must now compete more directly with asian apparel producers for the u.s.market . they argued that the ldc provision has slowed fabric and yarn production investment in africa , becausethese materials could be imported cheaplyfrom asia for use in agoa - eligible apparel with no need for costly investments . they feared that an extension ofthe ldc provision would provide adisincentive to textile milling investment in africa , because the deadline would lose its credibility as investorsanticipated further extensions . african agricultural producers have previously faced difficulties in meeting thesestandards . the agoa acceleration actcalls for the placement of 20 full - time personnel to at least 10 countries in africa to provide this assistance . someobservers are skeptical about theeffectiveness of technical assistance without increased market access . others are concerned that u.s. technicalassistance is hindered by laws restrictingagricultural technical assistance to products that would compete with u.s. farm products . apparel producers havereportedly already left lesotho , with a loss of 7,000jobs . ( 3 ) this makes export diversification in africaall the more vital . agoa iii extends the preference program to 2015 from its previous 2008 deadline . agoa iii supporters claimed that many agoa beneficiaries had onlyrecently begun to realize gains as a result of agoa , and that extending agoa benefits would improve the stabilityof the investment climate in africa . agoa iii also provides for apparel rules of origin and product eligibility benefits ; it extends the third - country fabricrule for ldcs , and encourages foreigninvestment and the development of agriculture and physical infrastructures . extension of lesser developed country provision . one of the more controversial aspects of agoa iii wasthe extension of the ldc provision . if the ldc provision had not been extended , ldcs would no longer haveduty - free access to the united states for apparelmade from third - country fabric after september 30 , 2004 . supporters of the extension claimed that if the ldcprovision was not extended , the apparel industrymay have contracted significantly , causing a loss of many of the gains from agoa , as apparel assembly plants wereshut down .