some of the most prominent ones are described below . generally at issue is whether or not dod has adequately responded to congressional directives on cmd . this question is best addressed by examining the three main parts of the 1996 congressional cmd initiative: a suitable coordination of cmd with ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) efforts , the development of cmd for near - term as well as advanced cm threats , and affordability and operational effectiveness for all cmd efforts . congress directed dod to undertake bmd and cmd efforts in a mutually supportive fashion . some argue that pentagon efforts on cmd have taken a back seat to bmd efforts . in terms of resource allocation , much more focus has been placed on ballistic missile defense than on cmd . congress noted that cmd measures should be undertaken with operational effectiveness as a core criterion . since interoperability of resources remains the paramount feature in the pentagon's activities to develop effective cmd , consequences associated with jointness are a key factor to monitor . further , several cmd objectives will likely enable other mission areas . an effective siap , for example , not only will offer cmd applications but also will enable counter - air operations and battlefield interdiction efforts . increased jointness associated with cmd efforts may also create some level of organizational friction , and congress may come under pressure to provide oversight to resolve service "turf battles. as cmd efforts become more integrated , service control over traditionally clear boundaries may get cloudier . with enhanced ifc , for example , air force or navy assets may be able to direct ground - based weapons that are currently under army control . it is possible that narrow service interests may hinder the implementation of—and thus effectiveness of—future joint cmd capabilities . moreover , will the services' cmd operational overlap lead to a reorganization of which services control—and are funded by congress for—certain weapons systems and programs ? the congressional directive to develop affordable cmd measures is an important issue in terms of procurement . current cost - exchange ratios associated with cms favor attackers over defenders ; cruise missiles can be cheap and defenses are costly . for example , patriot missiles , bought at roughly $2.5 million apiece , can be effective interceptors for incoming cms , but those cms may be simple designs costing only a couple hundred thousand dollars apiece . moreover , intercept costs are only one of many kill chain expenditures that can make cmd forces much more expensive than the cm threat . on the whole , the pentagon seems to have promoted the pursuit of advanced cmd programs to combat sophisticated cm attacks . in terms of simple cm threats , however , more resources may be needed to produce less costly but nonetheless effective defenses . dod's defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) has a low - cost cruise missile defense program that focuses on countering low - tech cms by reducing the cost of interceptors . darpa hopes to develop cmd interceptors that would cost as little as $40,000 .