no such legislation has been enacted . congress did not act on this proposal . also in the 112 th congress , h.r . 5911 / s. 2148 would have amended provisions of tsca imposing the renovation , repair , and painting requirements , but neither chamber acted on this proposal . in the 111 th congress , s. 1245 would have provided owners of residential properties built before 1960 with a tax credit for lbp abatement costs . similar proposals were introduced in previous congresses . a more general expansion of mandates as well as grant eligibility for housing with lead - based paint was proposed in the 110 th congress . s. 2244 would have required "a seller or lessor of housing to: ( 1 ) conduct a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of lead - based paint hazards ... ; ( 2 ) disclose to the purchaser or lessee the results of such inspection or assessment and hazard control measures carried out ; ( 3 ) remediate any lead - based paint hazards found ; and ( 4 ) include in any contract for the purchase or lease of housing documentation of any inspection , risk assessment , or hazard control measure. some phas are units of general local government . in such cases , local government may be responsible for implementing hud's lbp testing and abatement regulations in public housing . there are no federal mandates related to lbp in privately owned housing unless it receives federal financial assistance in some form . there are , however , epa ( 40 c.f.r . part 745 ) and hud ( 24 c.f.r . part 35 ) rules governing the manner in which home renovations and inspections are conducted by contractors . these rules require training and certification of contractors and prohibit certain practices ( such as dry scraping or high - temperature heat guns ) that would increase the risk of exposure to lead - based paint . the residential lead - based paint hazard reduction act of 1992 ( title x of the housing and community development act of 1992 ) authorizes federal grants to state and local governments that choose to establish lbp poisoning prevention programs targeted at low - income residents in private housing . grants may be used to conduct risk assessments and to remove , immobilize , or otherwise reduce the lbp hazard , with particular attention to hazards to children living in housing constructed prior to 1978 . congressional authorization for these grants expired september 30 , 1994 , but presidents have continued to request funds , and congress has continued to appropriate them . for fy2001 through fy2012 , congress appropriated funds for state and local grants to reduce lead - based paint hazards , as shown in figure 1 . since fy1992 , congress has appropriated more than $1.5 billion for these title x grants to state and local governments to assess and reduce lbp risks in private housing for low - income residents . in addition , congress has appropriated roughly $400 million , also under title x , for related lbp abatement by nongovernmental organizations and for training , certification , and research programs .