1984 ) , cert . denied , 469 u.s. 1229 ( 1985 ) . the act applies only to the sale of goods ( i.e. , it does not apply to the sale of services ) and only where each sale is of goods purchased for resale within the united states ( i.e. , it does not prohibit price differentials between goods sold for resale within the united states and those sold for export. ) among the affirmative defenses permitted to refute the robinson - patman illegality of differential pricing is the so - called "meeting competition" defense , which has at least two levels: a defendant may assert ( and must prove ) that the lower price charged to a favored buyer was selected in order to permit the seller to meet that of a competing seller ( primary line competition ) ; or he may assert ( and must prove ) that the challenged price was necessary in order to enable his buyer to meet the competition of one of the buyer's competitors ( secondary line competition ) . a seller may not , however , knowingly "beat" the prices of a competitor . jefferson county stressed that robinson - patman's prohibitions against unjustified discriminatory price differentials in the sale of commodities of "like grade and quality" dictated that government [nonprofit hospital] purchases for use in retail competition with private enterprise , as opposed to those for "traditional governmental [hospital] functions," are fully subject to the strictures of the act . the court held that purchases of pharmaceuticals by the university of alabama hospital for uses other than in the treatment of its patients , as , for example , in retail sales , may not be made at prices which would give the university hospital an unfair price advantage over its competitors in the retail sale of pharmaceuticals . health maintenance organizations were found to be "eligible institutions" under the nonprofit institutions act in de modena v. kaiser foundation health plan , inc. , 743 f.2d 1388 ( 9 th cir . after acknowledging that the act "does not explicitly list hps [health plans]," and that no case law at that time specifically included hps as "charitable" institutions , the appeals court relied on "precedent defining the term charitable for purposes of the tax code and the law of charitable trusts" to reach its conclusion: "[t]he emergence of social welfare , insurance , and municipal hospitals [has] drastically reduced the number of poor requiring free or below cost medical services . this reduction eliminated the rationale upon which the traditional , limited definition of charitable was predicated , resulting in a move towards a less restrictive interpretation of the term in recent years . now all non - profit organizations which promote health are considered charitable under the law of charitable trusts . further , a number of courts have specifically held that health maintenance organizations , such as hps , are charitable institutions for tax purposes . given this increasingly liberal interpretation of the term , we conclude that the [defendant] hps are charitable institutions within the meaning of the nonprofit institutions act .