the irs may require additional information . on the application , the organization will need to tell the irs that it is either a public charity or a private foundation . an organization may request a referral to this office for an issue requiring technical advice . if the irs approves the application , a favorable determination letter is sent to the organization . as discussed above , if the application for â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status was filed in a timely manner , the exemption will generally be effective back to the date of the organization's formation . the organization may not participate in any political campaign activity . organizations that meet these qualifications must generally apply to the internal revenue service ( irs ) for recognition of their â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status . some religious organizations , such as churches , do not have to seek recognition from the irs of their tax - exempt status . additionally , organizations , other than private foundations , with normally no more than $5,000 in annual gross receipts do not have to apply for recognition . an organization should try to file the application soon after its formation . if the application is filed within 27 months of the organization's formation , the exemption will generally be effective back to the date of formation . the irs may grant an extension depending on the circumstances . eo determinations may ask an organization for further information . difficult cases , eg , where there is no precedent or technical advice is needed , are referred to irs headquarters . the exemption will not be effective back to formation if the irs requires the organization to make changes in its structure or operations in order to receive the exemption or if the application was not timely filed . in both cases , the effective date of the exemption will be provided in the determination letter . once the exemption has been approved , the organization may generally continue to rely on its â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status unless there is a material change in the organization's purpose or activities that is inconsistent with the exemption requirements . additionally , events outside of the organization's control may affect its status , including new laws , treaties , court decisions , or regulations . the irs expects to respond to an exemption application within four months of the application's receipt . in general , private foundations receive contributions from limited sources and do not directly provide charitable services . due to fear of abuse , private foundations are subject to stricter regulation than public charities . an organization is a private foundation unless it shows the irs that it meets the requirements to be a public charity . some organizations , such as churches , schools , and hospitals , automatically qualify to be public charities . other organizations will be classified as public charities if they can show the irs that they receive substantial public support . applications are sent to irs exempt organization ( eo ) determinations .