preemptive war . initiating general war with north korea is an unlikely option forthe united states , as south korea would be unwilling to sustain the resultant , huge costs on its population withoutextremeprovocation . in theory , however , two policy objectives might be met . first , should regime change in north koreabecome a prioritypolicy objective , a military march to pyongyang might be the only sure means available . second , should a majornorth korean attacksouth appear imminent , the policy of preemptive attack might offer advantages: the initial allied targeting andassaults could reducenorth korean capabilities to destroy seoul , wmd could be destroyed or captured , and allied commanders wouldbe able to executetheir plan with nonattritted forces - - a particular advantage if the united states followed a doctrine of rapid , joint,and coordinatedattacks throughout the depth of north korea . improve defensive posture . recognizing that the current situation is unusuallytense , the united states and south korea could adopt a policy of temporarily increasing military preparedness todeter a northkorean military strike , ( 10 ) improve allied odds todefeat such a strike , or reinforce diplomatic firmness . the least provocative actionmight be to add more robust intelligence and warning activities , both those based in south korea and those usingspace assets andadjoining air and sea access . other options include: upgrading and testing alternate command headquarters,including thoseunderground , as well as information and communications networks ; adding more air and missile defense assets toprotect additionalkey government and military facilities in south korea and japan ; and , strengthening unit reception plans andfacilities forreinforcements . in so far as the north korean crisis is recognized as a priority military challenge to the unitedstates , the measuresabove are , in some cases , underway , according to recent press reports . ( 11 ) although possible , it is unlikely that north korea wouldattack solely in response to such gradual , defensive measures . it might , however , feel greater pressure to either reacha diplomaticsolution or expend more resources on its own military establishment . calling up south korean reservists or moving additional u.s. combat forces into the peninsula might also be considered . unlessdone in response to overtly hostile north korean actions or intentions , such actions would most likely be construedas a seriousprovocation or possibly a prelude to an allied attack . north korean sensitivity is illustrated by statements of concerneven whentemporary u.s. buildups and exercises are held in okinawa . ( 12 ) military enforcement of sanctions . should north korea attempt to export weapons of mass destruction , longer range missiles , or the materials to create such things , interception on the highseas or in the air bymilitary forces might be considered . ( 13 ) u.s. andinternational policy objectives would be to enforce nonproliferation goals and,perhaps secondarily , to restrict hard currency gains from such transactions . such a "blockade," "quarantine," or"containment," to beeffective , would require large , dedicated u.s. navy and air force participation , and at least some coast guardassets .