icras operates as a working group . the office of management and budget chairs icras . the u.s. export - import bank provides country risk assessments and risk rating recommendations , which must be agreed on by all the icras agencies . omb is then responsible for determining the expected loss rates associated with each icras risk rating and maturity level . each sovereign borrower or guarantor is rated on an 11-category scale , ranging from a to f - . some analysts , including the government accountability office ( gao ) , raise concerns about the official process for estimating the cost of foreign loans to the united states , and thus the cost needed to forgive u.s. debt . omb's current methodology uses rating agency corporate default data and interest rate spreads in a model it developed to estimate default probabilities and makes assumptions about recoveries after default to estimate expected loss rates . according to gao , the method that omb employs may calculate lower loss rates than may be justified for the sovereign debt of emerging economies . the paris club does not exist as a formal institution . it is rather a set of rules and principles for debt relief that have been agreed on by its members . to facilitate paris club operations , the french treasury provides a small secretariat , and a senior official of the french treasury is appointed chairman . the current paris club chairman is jean - pierre jouyet , under - secretary of the french treasury . in addition to representatives from the creditor and debtor nations , officials from the international financial institutions ( ifis ) and the regional development banks are represented at paris club discussions . the ifis present their assessment of the debtor country's economic situation to the paris club . to date ( july 2017 ) , the paris club has reached 433 agreements with 90 debtor countries . the total amount of debt covered in paris club agreements — rescheduled or reduced — is approximately $583 billion . since the first debt restructuring took place in 1956 , the terms , rules , and principles of the paris club have evolved to their current shape . this evolution occurred primarily through the g7 / 8 summits . five 'principles' and four 'rules' currently govern paris club treatments . any country that accepts the rules and principles may , in principle , become a member of the paris club . yet since the paris club permanent members are the major international creditor countries , they determine its practices . the five paris club 'principles' stipulate the general terms of all paris club treatments .