not all members agree . some house members and outside observers believe that structural change is not necessary . for them , the absence of a policyconsensus on major issues among house members slows legislative action more than does any kind oforganizational inadequacy . finally , possible jurisdictional realignment and the current house bill referral process are integrally related . some members contendthat , had the 1974 rules change permitting multiple referrals been accompanied by a proposed comprehensiverealignment ofcommittee jurisdictions , current referral problems and calls for jurisdictional change might have been lessened . others note,however , that the house has undertaken major jurisdictional and structural changes in its committee system , mostrecently in 1995 ; they believe action now is less urgent . the following section briefly notes various options that have been suggested , currently or in the recent past , for altering housecommittee jurisdictions . the primary arguments for and against each approach are noted . the list below isillustrative of the rangeof ideas and approaches under consideration . additionally , some advocates of jurisdictional change might want twoor moreapproaches combined , depending upon the policy issues to be addressed in a particular reorganization scheme . clarify existing language without shifting jurisdictions . clarification couldeliminate ambiguous and unclear rule language and replace outdated terms with more modern ones . current referralpractices,precedents , and agreements between committees could be written into the rules . on the other hand , clarification would not necessarily reflect all current issues in rule language and reduce jurisdictional overlap andcompetition . neater jurisdictions might not get at the heart of the problem , and could deny members the opportunityto exploredifferent approaches to policy problems between committees . extensive jurisdictional realignment . changes could eliminate the most glaringpolicy overlaps and consolidate jurisdiction in a number of key areas , such as homeland security . no committeeswould beeliminated , and jurisdictions could be equalized . changes would not necessarily consolidate all fragmented and overlapping policy areas and could create others . in addition , thegreater number of committees affected by jurisdictional realignment , the greater is the likelihood that a coalitionof members whoopposed different reform proposals could be assembled to defeat a major reform plan . numerous committees with narrow jurisdictions . narrowly focused panels couldcreate committees better balanced in terms of workload and policy attractiveness , permit more in - depth attentionto policy issues , andlessen the chances that issues lose priority on a committee's agenda due to competing demands . narrowly focused panels could exacerbate the workload , scheduling , and assignment concerns related to numerous committees . forexample , members might not be willing to serve only on two committees if committees have reduced areas of policyconcern . few committees with broad jurisdictions . this option would create jurisdictionsaround broad national problems . committees would be more equal in breadth , workload , and policy attractiveness . as such , thepolicymaking process could be streamlined and the number of committee assignments would be reduced . to somedegree , rulesmight also be changed to have a greater number of members serve only on one committee . too few committees with too much jurisdiction might deny issues the attention they deserve . with excessive consolidation ofcommittees , subcommittees might proliferate , further decentralizing policymaking .