it has tracked ships in distress far out to sea . and only a small fraction of vessels can be identified automatically . officials acknowledge the limited progress that the department of homeland security and the coast guard have made toward creating a viable defense here in miami or at harbors nationwide against a maritime attack , despite the billions of dollars invested since 2001.... miami was selected to serve as a laboratory for the maritime domain awareness project... . the surveillance effort in miami , known as project hawkeye , was intended to search out vessels that might present a threat , allowing the coast guard to try to foil an impending attack . using radar , the coast guard would track boats larger than 25 feet within 12 miles of shore . the cameras cover just a sliver of the harbor and coasts . smaller vessels—as little as a jet ski—would be tracked with infrared cameras up to five miles offshore . the surveillance would cover an area from fort lauderdale to the florida keys . to identify which vessels among the thousands might pose a danger , the coast guard would rely on sophisticated software that would assemble and analyze all this data . under the plan , coast guard officials would be alerted when boats entered restricted waters , loitered in a vulnerable spot or displayed an unusual course or speed . the cameras have at times proved helpful , allowing the coast guard to investigate how a ship went aground or to monitor security contractors at the cruise ship terminal , to make sure they are doing their job , said capt . liam slein , deputy commander of the miami sector . that means that very little of what the cameras are filming or the radar is tracking is ever used or even watched . the data is of such limited value that at least for now , the coast guard has assigned only volunteers to deal with it.... a surveillance system similar to the one in miami is supposed to be installed at as many as 35 ports . but given the challenges here , and the unwillingness of congress to finance the still - unproven effort , the coast guard has delayed expanding the effort to other ports until at least 2014 . a march 31 , 2007 , press article about a private - sector vessel tracking system called the automated vessel tracking system states in part: the automated secure vessel tracking system has proven itself to businesses around the world . it gave real - time information to oil companies as hurricane katrina raged in 2005 , helping them follow oil platforms that had been torn from their moorings . but the system is getting more attention these days because of who isn't using it: the coast guard . juneau is one of the few coast guard district headquarters that subscribes to the system . congress ordered the coast guard to begin testing by sunday a system that would track all ships approaching u.s. ports . the coast guard says a system will be in place , but critics are concerned that it will prove to be insufficient .