527 organizations are subject to tax only on political organization taxable income . this is the organization's gross income , excluding exempt function income , less $100 and any allowable deductions . an exempt function does not necessarily involve explicitly advocating for or against the individual . for example , when determining whether an issue advocacy communication is for an exempt function , the irs looks at such things as whether it identifies a candidate , identifies his or her position on the issue and this has been raised to distinguish the candidate from others , is timed to coincide with an election , targets voters in a particular election , and is not part of an ongoing series of similar communications by the organization on the same issue . exempt function income is any amount received , to the extent that it is segregated to use for an exempt function , as: contributions of money or other property , membership dues , fees , or assessments , proceeds , which are not received in the ordinary course of business , from political fundraising and entertainment events or from the sale of campaign materials , and proceeds from conducting a bingo game . the tax rate is generally the highest corporate income tax rate . however , under irc ยง 527 ( h ) , income of the principal campaign committee of a congressional candidate is taxed using the graduated corporate tax rate schedule . this is not true for campaign committees of candidates for state or local office . 527 organizations include the entities regulated by the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , as amended by the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) . for example , political parties and candidate committees are 527 organizations . however , because some 527 organizations are unrelated to federal elections , not all 527 organizations are regulated by feca . in recent years , there has been considerable debate about the extent to which feca regulates certain types of 527 organizations and the constitutional limitations on such regulation . for more information , see crs report rl33888 , section 527 political organizations: background and issues for federal election and tax laws , by [author name scrubbed] , erika lunder , and [author name scrubbed] . prior to 2000 , certain political organizations received the tax benefits of section 527 without reporting their existence to the fec or the irs . this was because not all 527 organizations reported to the fec under feca and organizations only filed a return to the irs if they had taxable income . the fact that organizations could qualify under section 527 without reporting to the fec was largely unnoticed until 1996 , when the irs began issuing guidance on the types of activities that qualify as exempt functions . this awareness helped lead to an increase in the number of 527 organizations , called "stealth pacs," that were designed to avoid reporting to the fec . in 2000 and 2002 , congress amended section 527 to require that organizations report to the irs , the fec , or a state .