this report will be updated as warranted . see also crs report rs21794 , iraq coalition: publicopinionindicators in selected european countries , by [author name scrubbed] . during the morning rush hour of march 11 , 2004 , bombs hidden in 10 backpacks exploded within 15 minutesof eachother on four trains along a nine - mile stretch of a commuter line from the suburb of santa eugenia to the busyatocharail terminal in madrid . three other backpack bombs were defused by police . the explosions killed 191 personsandwounded over 1800 others . the death toll was by far the largest ever for a terrorist attack in spain and was thelargestin europe since the 1988 bombing of a pan am airliner over lockerbie , scotland . the attacks took place exactlytwoand one - half years after the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 . the spanish government , led by prime minister jose maria aznar of the right - of - center popular party ( pp ) , quicklyinsisted that the attacks were the work of the basque terrorist group eta and downplayed any suggestion thatislamicextremists could be involved . in justifying their view , spanish officials noted that they had stopped an eta efforttoplace bombs on trains on christmas eve 2003 and had intercepted on february 29 a madrid - bound van loaded bytheeta with one thousand pounds of explosives . on the day of the attack , at spain's urging , the u.n. security councilpassed resolution 1530 , which condemned eta's alleged role in the bombing . however , skeptics noted that thescope of the attacks , the detailed planning and precision needed to carry them out , and above all , the huge casualtytollwere more likely to be hallmarks of al qaeda or an al qaeda - like organization , not eta . the credibility of the government began to crumble quickly as indications emerged of the possible involvement ofislamic extremists in the bombings . less than four hours after the attacks , police found several detonators and anaudiotape of verses from the koran in an abandoned van in the town of alcala de henares , through which thebombedtrains had passed . about 12 hours after the attacks , police found a cellphone from an unexploded backpack bomb . they traced it to a business owned by a moroccan immigrant named jamal zougam , who was suspected of havinglinks to al qaeda . despite these discoveries on the day of the attacks , the government continued to insist publiclythateta was responsible until hours before the polls opened on march 14 , when police arrested zougam as well as twoother moroccans and two indians suspected of involvement in the attacks . ( 1 ) the government's perceived mishandling of the crisis sparked outrage among many spaniards . critics of the government charged that it had deliberately tried to focus blame on eta rather than al qaeda , knowing that if thepublic believed that eta had committed the attacks , the government's popularity could be enhanced , due to thebroadpublic support for its hard - line stance against eta .