table 1 . top diversity visa sending countries , fy1997-fy2002 source: crs analysis of uscis admissions data , reported by dhs office of immigration statistics . pdf version the sending world regions for diversity visas , as intended , differ substantially from the sending regions for family - based andemployment - based immigration . as figure 1 illustrates , european immigrants comprised 39.4%of the diversity visa recipients incontrast to 10.4% of the family - based and employment - based immigrants in fy2002 . african immigrants received38.1% of thediversity visas in contrast to 3.6% of the family - based and employment - based visas . caribbean , latin american,and asianimmigrants dominated family - based and employment - based immigration , and as a result , made up much smallerpercentages of thediversity visa immigrants . to be eligible for a diversity visa , the ina requires that an alien must have a high school education or the equivalent , or two yearsexperience in an occupation which requires at least two years of training or experience . ( 4 ) the alien or the alien's spouse must be anative of one of the countries listed as a foreign state qualified for the diversity visa lottery . diversity lottery winners , like all other aliens wishing to come to the united states , must undergo reviews performed by departmentof state consular officers abroad and dhs inspectors upon entry to the u.s. ( 5 ) these reviews are intended to ensure that they are notineligible for visas or admission under the grounds for inadmissibility spelled out in the ina . ( 6 ) these criteria for exclusion aregrouped into the following categories: health - related grounds ; criminal history ; security and terrorist concerns ; public charge ( eg , indigence ) ; seeking to work without proper labor certification ; illegal entrants and immigration law violations ; ineligible for citizenship ; and , aliens previously removed . the state department announced the fy2005 lottery on august 19 , 2003 . the 60-day application period began on november 1 , 2003and ended on december 30 , 2003 . ( 7 ) for the first time,applications for the diversity lottery must have been submitted electronically . entrants received an electronic confirmation notice upon receipt of a completed entry form . paper forms were notaccepted . sincethe objective of the diversity lottery is to encourage immigration from regions with lower immigration rates , nativesof countries withhigh admissions are usually ineligible . for fy2005 , the ineligible countries were: canada , china ( mainland born ) ,columbia,dominican republic , el salvador , haiti , india , jamaica , mexico , pakistan , the philippines , russia , south korea,the united kingdomand dependent territories , and vietnam . ( 8 ) when applying for a diversity visa , petitioners had to follow the instructions issued by the state department precisely . if there wereany mistakes or inconsistencies with the petition , it may have been disqualified by the state department . in thefy2003 lottery , over2 million of the 8.7 million applications were disqualified for failure to comply with the instructions .