rural homeowners . fcs can lend for the purchase , construction , improvement , or refinancing of single - family dwellings in rural areas ( 2,500 population limit ) . farmer - owned cooperatives and certain rural utilities ( electric and telecom ) . figure 4 illustrates fcs's portfolio of loans outstanding ( $238 billion as of march 31 , 2016 ) . about 65% of the loan portfolio is in the primary categories of farm real estate and operating loans . figure 5 presents the loan portfolio by size of loan and the number of borrowers in each size category . about 74% of borrowers ( 402,000 out of 527,000 ) have loans under $250,000 in size and account for 14% of the loan portfolio . at the other extreme , 49 borrowers ( 0.009% of 527,000 ) have loans over $250 million and account for 9% of the loan portfolio . the federal agricultural mortgage company ( farmer mac ) was established in the agricultural credit act of 1987 as a secondary market for agricultural loans . it purchases and pools qualified loans and may sell them to investors as securities or hold them in its own portfolio . although farmer mac is statutorily part of the farm credit act and is regulated by fca , it has no liability for the debt of any other fcs institution , and the other fcs institutions have no liability for farmer mac debt . it is considered a separate gse . farmer mac is an investor - owned corporation , not a member - owned cooperative . voting stock may be owned by banks , insurance companies , and fcs institutions . nonvoting stock may be owned by any investor . its board of directors has members from the fcs , commercial banks , and the public at large . farmer mac operates two programs: farmer mac i ( loans not guaranteed by the u.s. department of agriculture [usda] ) and farmer mac ii ( usda - guaranteed loans ) . a majority of farmer mac i volume comes from the sale of "long - term standby purchase agreements. farmer mac promises to purchase specific agricultural mortgages , thus guaranteeing the loans against default risk while the participating lender retains interest rate risk . under farmer mac ii , the company purchases the portion of individual loans that are guaranteed by usda . on these purchases , farmer mac accepts the interest rate risk but carries no default risk . borrowers must meet eligibility and creditworthiness requirements . types of eligible borrowers and the scope of their financing can be grouped into the following categories ( eg , 12 u.s.c . 2017 , 2075 , and 2129 ) : full - time farmers . for individuals with over 50% of their assets and income from agriculture , fcs can lend for all agricultural , family , and non - agricultural needs ( including vehicles , education , home improvements , and living expenses ) . part - time farmers . for individuals who own farmland or produce agricultural products but earn less than 50% of their income from agriculture , fcs can lend for all agricultural and family needs . non - agricultural lending is limited . farming - related businesses .