these are discussed below . the peace corps has always had in place various procedures and processes to address the issues of volunteer safety and security , but such efforts have been particularly pronounced in the past decade . following a 2002 government accountability office ( gao ) finding that "peace corps efforts to ensure effective implementation of its safety and security policies have produced varying results," the peace corps launched numerous initiatives — including establishment of a stand - alone safety and security office to direct and oversee all security programs , deployment of u.s. direct hire field - based safety and security officers and local hire safety and security personnel , and appointment at headquarters of regional desk officers and a chief compliance officer to monitor compliance with new security rules and procedures . nonetheless , gao reported on march 24 , 2004 , that some "unevenness" in compliance with procedures mandated by headquarters likely remained . peace corps has taken additional steps to improve safety and security , most notably , in 2008 , establishing a sexual assault working group to examine risk factors , analyze training , and adopt best practices to reduce risk and address victims' needs . in late 2010 , the agency approved establishment of a victim's advocate position in response to suggestions from returned volunteers . the advocate supports volunteer victims of crime , from the crime through post - peace corps service , including helping them sort through the red tape to receive postservice health benefits . in february 2011 , the office of safety and security issued a document on guidelines for responding to rape and major sexual assault that captures the policies and procedures in place to assist and respond to volunteer rape or major sexual assault . peace corps staff are expected to serve as advocates for the volunteer and ensure "that what happens next is in the volunteer's best interest. this includes ensuring a safe environment and emotional stability , providing medical care and counseling , and helping preserve a volunteer's right to prosecute . between april and november 2012 , over 350 staff abroad were trained on these protocols . many of these efforts were strengthened or added to as a result of the 2011 kate puzey volunteer protection act discussed below . in two november 2013 reports on the status of implementation of aspects of the kate puzey act — specifically sexual assault training and the agency's sexual assault policy — the peace corps ig found that "many elements of the peace corps' sexual assault policy are in place , but full compliance with the kate puzey act remains a work in progress. sexual assault training conforming to existing best practices was being provided to all 27-month volunteers . returning to the issue in a november 2016 evaluation report , the peace corps ig found that , "compared to our ... evaluation in 2013 , the peace corps markedly improved how it supported volunteers who had reported a sexual assault. in its october 2015 report , the peace corps sexual assault advisory council , made up of 19 outside experts on the subject and rpcvs , lauded the agency's commitment to kate puzey act mandates .