reg . 82462 , shortly before the clinton administration left office . the privacy rule went into effect on april 14 , 2001 . on august 14 , 2002 , hhs published in the federal register a modified privacy rule , 67 fed . reg . enforcement of the privacy rule began on april 14 , 2003 , except for small health plans ( those with annual receipts of $5 million or less ) who have until april 2004 to comply . the hipaa privacy rule covers health plans , health care clearinghouses , and those health care providers who conduct certain financial and administrative transactions electronically . covered entities are bound by the new privacy standards even if they contract with others ( called "business associates" ) to perform essential functions . hipaa does not give hhs authority to regulate other private businesses or public agencies . covered entities that fail to comply with the rule are subject to civil and criminal penalties , but individuals do not have the right to sue for violations of the rule . instead , the law provides that individuals must direct their complaints to hhs' office for civil rights ( ocr ) . ocr maintains a web site with information on the new regulation , including guidance at http: / / www.hhs.gov / ocr / hipaa / . hhs also recently issued a 20 page "summary of the hipaa privacy rule. hhs will enforce the civil money penalties , and the department of justice will enforce the criminal penalties . criminal penalties may be imposed if the offense is committed under false pretenses , with intent to sell the information or reap other personal gain . hipaa authorizes the hhs secretary to impose civil money penalties of up to $25,000 for each year for those entities failing to comply with the privacy rule . several statutory limitations are imposed on the secretary's authority to impose civil money penalties ( cmp ) . a penalty may not be imposed: with respect to an act that constitutes an offense punishable under the criminal penalty provision ; "if it is established to the satisfaction of the secretary that the person liable for the penalty did not know , and by exercising reasonable diligence would not have known , that such person violated the provisions ; " if "the failure to comply was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect" and is corrected within a certain time period . a cmp may be reduced or waived "to the extent that the payment of such penalty would be excessive relative to the compliance failure involved. in addition , a number of procedural requirements are incorporated by reference in hipaa that are relevant to the imposition of cmp's . the secretary may not initiate a cmp action "later than six months after the date" of the occurrence that forms the basis for the cmp action . the secretary may initiate a cmp by serving notice in a manner authorized by rule 4 of the federal rules of civil procedure .