the chart below summarizes these contributions for recent years . for fy2003 , it is anticipated that the overall spending for unrwa will be similar to fy2002 . the state department does not provide a line item in its mra budget request by country or specific organization . for fy2004 , the overall request for the mra account is $760.2 million slightly less than the $787 million appropriated for fy2003 . of the total for next year , $555.95 million is requested for overseas refugee assistance , and of that , $102.32 million is requested for the near east . the u.s. contribution to unrwa usually covers 22-25% of the unrwa total budget . see the table below for a historical summary of u.s. contributions to unrwa . for information about other u.s. government funding to the palestinians , see crs report rs22370 , u.s. foreign aid to the palestinians , by [author name scrubbed] . 87-510 , the migration and refugee assistance act of 1962 , as amended , is the permanent legislative authority under which u.s. refugee relief programs operate . annual mra funding is authorized in department of state authorizing bills and appropriated in the foreign operations appropriations acts . language describing unrwa assistance appears in the state department budget in brief for fy2004 . in cy2001 , over 50 countries contributed to unrwa . these meetings are typically held in may and september . ninety - five percent of the unrwa budget is funded through voluntary contributions from governments and the european union . most of these funds are in cash ; approximately 7% is made up of in - kind donations . another 4% comes largely from the u.n. regular budget and covers international staff costs . there are also voluntary cash contributions earmarked for specific projects . unrwa funds are distributed among various programs including , education , health , relief and social services , and operational and common services . refugees also make contributions where appropriate or possible in the form of co - payments , self help projects , or voluntary contributions . the unrwa's regular budget for calendar year ( cy ) 2003 is $344 million . more than half of its budget is spent on educational and health programs . the project budget comprises mostly non - recurrent costs specifically earmarked by donors . unrwa has recently made internal changes to improve its management and administration of resources , for example over the last several years , it has developed a new financial system , refined its budget presentations , and expanded its auditing procedures . the department of state , bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) , deals with problems of refugees worldwide , conflict victims , and populations of concern to the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) . assistance includes a range of services from basic needs to community services to tolerance building and dialogue initiatives . key programs include refugee protection ( asylum issues , identification , returns , tracing activities ) and quick impact , small community projects . refugee emergencies lasting more than a year are funded from the regular migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account through prm .