that is no longer the case . in 2008 , congress amended the section to make it clear that the provision covers misconduct during both declared wars and periods of armed conflict for which congress has explicitly authorized use of the armed forces . the same amendment extended the period of suspension from three to five years . the provision applies to crimes related to conduct of the conflict as well as those that are not . the offense , however , must "involve the defrauding of the united states in [some] pecuniary manner or in a manner concerning property. the provision's five - year clock begins to run with the end of the war or conflict , but there is some difference of opinion over whether a formal termination must come first . indictment or information : the statute of limitations runs until an indictment or information is found and returned to the court . there is , however , some question about the impact of sealing the indictment upon its return . the federal rules of criminal procedure allow the magistrate to whom the indictment is returned to seal it until the defendant is apprehended or released on bail . some courts seem troubled when they believe that the seal has been applied for purposes of tactical advantage rather than to prevent the escape of the accused . the statute of limitations remains tolled if the original indictment is replaced by a superseding indictment , as long as the superseding indictment does not substantially alter the original charge . if the indictment or information is subsequently dismissed , federal law extends the statute of limitations an additional six months ( 30 days if the indictment or information is dismissed on appeal and there is a grand jury with jurisdiction in place ) . beyond the extension here , when a timely indictment is dismissed pursuant to a plea agreement under which the defendant pleads to other charges , the statute of limitations ordinarily begins again for the dismissed charges unless the defendant has waived as part of the plea agreement . foreign evidence : section 3292 was enacted to compensate for the delays the justice department experienced when it sought to secure bank records and other evidence located overseas . construction of section 3292 has been something less than uniform , thus far . the courts are divided over whether the target of the grand jury or the subject of the foreign evidence sought may contest the government's application when it is filed or whether the application may be filed ex parte with an opportunity for the accused to contest suspension following indictment . by the same token , it is less certain whether the phrase indicating that the application must be filed with "the district court before which a grand jury is impaneled to investigate the offense," means that the application must relate to a specific grand jury investigation or may be filed in anticipation of such an investigation . on the related issue of when an application may be filed , one court has ruled that the government may seek the suspension either to allow it to obtain foreign evidence or to compensate it for time expended to acquire the evidence prior to the application .