most of these horses were raised for other purposes , like riding . there are no national oversight organizations that can verify the honesty of a nonprofit equine rescue. the national horse protection coalition ( nhpc ) asserted that sanctuary associations have accreditation programs and "strict guidelines," and that state and local animal welfare laws exist to ensure humane animal care . others counter that such guidelines , if they exist , have not been endorsed or overseen by any nationally recognized authority , and that most state and local laws are anti - cruelty measures , not proactive care standards . some , including the humane society of the united states ( hsus ) , have observed that equine shelters are less well - established than cat and dog shelters , which often are associated with local governments and humane societies . citing the "extreme costs" and staff time needed to shelter horses , hsus warned of needing to be aware of "distinctions between sheltering horses and sheltering other companion animals. the american association of equine practitioners estimated that the cost of a horse's basic care approximates $1,825 annually , exclusive of veterinary and farrier care . a more recent study estimated the annual cost of caring for an unwanted horse at $2,340 . nhpc has argued: "not every horse currently going to slaughter will be rescued by one of these non - profit organizations , but many horses will be kept longer , will be sold directly to a new owner ... or will be humanely euthanized by a licensed veterinarian," among other alternatives . euthanasia methods — primarily chemical injection and in some emergency situations , gunshots — are considered by the nhpc and others to be more humane than slaughter , which generally involves stunning with a captive bolt to make the animal unconscious before it is killed and bled . euthanasia averages from $50 to $150 per horse , a "tiny fraction of the cost of keeping a horse as a companion or work animal," nhpc has stated in response to arguments about the high expense of dealing with a horse diverted from slaughter . opponents of a slaughter ban contend that disposing of many additional horses each year could create environmental problems , such as soil and groundwater contamination . ban supporters counter that hundreds of thousands of u.s. horses die naturally or are euthanized each year , and are now safely disposed of . many are not buried but sent to rendering plants , where their remains are used in industrial products and animal feeds . renderers already handle millions of cattle and hogs that die before slaughter ; another 90,000 horses easily could be absorbed into the existing system , ban supporters maintain . one issue has been whether the unwanted horses that had been sent to u.s. packing plants are now simply moving into canada and mexico to be slaughtered there — and if so , what if anything should be done to halt the practice . according to usda , the united states in 2006 exported nearly 26,000 live horses to canada and more than 19,000 to mexico . in 2007 , the year all three u.s. slaughter plants closed , 47,000 u.s. horses went to canada and 45,000 to mexico .