while neither h.r . 2 nor s. 462 became law , a compromise version was enacted as the quality housing and work responsibility act of 1998 ( qhwra ) , title v of the fy1999 departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development ( va - hud ) appropriations bill ( h.r . 4194 ) , signed into law by then - president bill clinton ( p.l . qhwra contained many provisions from h.r . 2 and s. 462 , including a version of the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement . hud did not issue regulations to implement the community service provisions of qhwra until march 29 , 2000 . the regulations took effect beginning on october 1 , 2000 , and were in effect for just over one year . language added to the fy2002 va - hud appropriations bill ( p.l . 107-73 ) , which was enacted in november 2001 , prohibited hud from using any fy2002 funds to enforce the community service and self - sufficiency requirements . the suspension of the provision ended when the fy2003 appropriations bill ( p.l . 108-7 ) was signed into law on february 21 , 2003 . hud issued new guidance to the local public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer public housing on june 20 , 2003 , instructing them to reinstate the community service requirement for public housing residents beginning on august 1 , 2003 . following full implementation of the community service requirement , legislation was introduced in several congresses to repeal the community service requirement , although it was not enacted . as is evident in its legislative and regulatory history , the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement for residents of public housing has been controversial since its inception . it is consistent with the movement toward required work and self - sufficiency activities that characterized the welfare reform debates of the same era , which culminated in the creation of the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program . supporters of mandatory work policies have argued that low - income families should earn the benefits or subsidies they are receiving . they have also argued that by compelling families into self - sufficiency activities , such policies can improve the lives of poor families and their children by potentially increasing their incomes . those who have argued against mandatory work requirements contend that such requirements are paternalistic and do not promote real self - sufficiency , but rather , low - wage work that may not be sustainable . all of these disagreements manifested during debate over the provision , and additional arguments were made specifically for and against the public housing requirement . proponents of the community service requirement cited concerns about a perceived negative culture at public housing developments and the possibility for the community service requirement to help change that culture . opponents of the provision argued specifically against the idea of a community service "requirement" for public housing residents , arguing it is akin to the forced community work mandated of criminals .