table 1 . selected economic indicators for indonesia's economy: 1997-2003 source: economist intelligence unit and government of indonesia . data for 2003 are estimates . for example , global insight , an international forecasting firm , predicts thatindonesia's real gdp will rise by 4.6% in 2004 and 5.0% in 2005 . *ppp data are measurements of foreign data in national currencies converted into u.s. dollars based on a comparable level of purchasing power these datawould have in the united states . the short - term economic prospects for indonesia are relatively positive . ( 9 ) however , indonesia faces a number of challenges that threaten to undermine long - termgrowth prospects . these include widespread government corruption and a weak legal system , ( 10 ) large public debt , extensive government controlof keyeconomic sectors ( such as oil and gas ) , a high level of corporate non - performing loans , a weak banking system,uncertainties surrounding the centralgovernment's efforts to decentralize fiscal and political authority to local governments , and failure by thegovernment to provide adequate protection ofintellectual property rights ( ipr ) . in addition , the existence and activities of several separatist movements andterrorist groups in indonesia constitute majorthreats to political and economic stability . ( 11 ) inoctober 2002 , terrorists with reported links to al qaeda bombed a club in bali frequented by western tourists,killing over 200 people ( including seven americans ) and wounding hundreds more . ( 12 ) in august 2003 , terrorists bombed a u.s. - run hotel in jakarta , killing12 people and wounding 150 . the bombings have had a chilling effect on indonesia's tourism industry and raisedmajor concerns over the safety of foreigntourists and businesspeople in indonesia . ethnic , religious , and separatist violence in the country has displaced 1.3million indonesians . according to the world trade organization , indonesia was the world's 28th largest exporter and the 39th largest importer in 2002 . indonesian trade data indicatethat japan was its largest trading partner in 2002 , followed by the united states , singapore , south korea , and china ( see table 2 ) . the united states wasindonesia's second largest export market and its third largest source of imports . major indonesian exports includedpetroleum and petroleum products , naturalgas , and clothing and accessories . its major imports were petroleum and petroleum products , organic chemicals,and general industrial machinery . ( 14 ) according to indonesian investment statistics ( which record approved investment , as opposed to actual investment ) ,the top five foreign investors in indonesiaare the united kingdom , japan , singapore , china , and malaysia . major sectors for fdi in indonesia includechemicals , pharmaceuticals , paper ; metal goods,transportation , and real estate . ( 15 ) table 2 . indonesia's major trading partner's: 2002 ( $billions ) source: united nations conference on trade and developmen . u.s. data indicate that indonesia is not a large u.s. trading partner . in 2003 , u.s. exports to , and imports , from indonesia were $2.5 billion and $9.5 billion,respectively , making indonesia the 37th largest u.s. export market and its 26th largestsource of imports .