1520.7 , which is summarized below . section 1520.7 ( a ) protects any security program "that relates to united states mail to be transported byair. section 1520.7 ( b ) through ( d ) covers security directives and information circulars , selection criteriaused in thesecurity screening process , and security contingency plans and / or instructions pertaining to those plans . ( 10 ) a second controversy arose when the u.s. attorney's office in miami dropped a criminal case against a former federal baggagescreener who was charged with stealing from passengers in november 2003 . ( 11 ) the u.s. attorney's office withdrew the chargesbecause a federal judge determined that the defense could cross - examine the prosecution's witnesses , which couldraise the possiblyof disclosing ssi about tsa's security and training procedures . the problem with the decision of the justicedepartment accordingto a tsa spokeswoman , is that "future prosecutions of dishonest agency employees would be hamstrung by thesame dilemma thatled to the dismissal of the indictment. ( 12 ) thepublic defender in the case suggested that "prosecutors could have drop[ped] the partof the conspiracy charge relating to the sensitive security information ... and [moved] forward with the other twounderlying offenses - - breaking into baggage and stealing their contents. ( 13 ) the u.s. attorney's office and tsa , however , decided the risk of releasingssi was too great . a third controversy involves the computer assisted passenger pre - screening system ( capps ) . in the summer of 2004 , tsa plans toupdate the system and call it capps ii . ( 14 ) theoriginal capps system attempted to screen passengers by "focusing primarily ontravel patterns and financial transactions. ( 15 ) thenew system , in addition to monitoring travel records , will check various personalrecords of passengers trying to make reservations . these records , combined with "cia , fbi , and other intelligencedatabases" , willbe used to select certain travelers for additional screening . then - tsa administrator loy stated , "i don't think thereis a single projectthat will do more potential good for aviation security. the system will be able "to trace would - be terrorists , evenif they leadapparently unremarkable lives. ( 16 ) some do notagree the system will function as tsa believes . ( 17 ) david sobel of the electronicprivacy information center thinks that capps ii is a "catch - 22" that will "present enormous challenges for clearingnames - - andan enormous temptation for misuse. for example , if a person is flagged by the system , sobel says they "are goingto want to know,'why am i pulled aside every time i take a flight ? ' since the system will contain ssi , the answer will be "sorry , wecan't tell you. ( 18 ) tsa officials point out that "a passenger advocate and appeals process" will be available when the system goesonline . ( 19 ) a fourth ssi controversy involves a security agreement between airport administrations , local police departments , and tsa officials . the agreements prohibit the local police from commenting on any incident involving ssi that has occurred onairport propertywithout authorization by the proper tsa officials . failure to comply with the agreement may mean the loss offinancial aid forairport security .