the steering committee is reconstituted each congress . regions are restructured to reflect as closely as possible an equal number of republican members from each region . each region elects its steering committee member . the conference resolution stated that elections for the at - large members would be held not later than 30 calendar days after the resolution was adopted . the six members receiving the greatest number of votes would be elected . the republican conference elected the six members on december 10 , 2015 . table 1 depicts the membership of the reconstituted republican steering committee as of july 1 , 2017 . democratic caucus rules address selecting committee chairs and ranking minority members . the democratic leader nominates a chair and ranking member for the committees on rules and house administration , who must be approved by the entire democratic caucus . the budget committee chair and ranking member are selected from among members choosing to run for the position . other chair and ranking member nominations are made by the democratic steering and policy committee and voted on by the entire democratic caucus . in making selections , the steering committee considers , pursuant to caucus rules , "merit , length of service on the committee and degree of commitment to the democratic agenda of the nominee , and the diversity of the caucus. the steering committee is reconstituted each congress , and regions can be restructured to reflect equal democratic representation among regions . service for less than a full session in a congress is disregarded . a rules change adopted on january 7 , 2003 , pursuant to h.res . 5 , exempted the intelligence committee chair from the limit . a rules change adopted on january 4 , 2005 , pursuant to h.res . 5 , exempted the rules committee chair from the limit . in 2009 , the democratic majority removed term limits from house rules . the rules adopted on january 3 , 2013 , reinstituted term limits for all committee chairs , but continued the exemption for the rules committee chair . republican conference rules delineate procedures for the selection of standing committee chairs and ranking minority members . the speaker , with the republicans in the majority , has the authority to nominate the chairs of the house administration committee and rules committee . in the minority , these appointments are made by the minority leader . the speaker's or minority leader's nominations for these two positions are submitted directly to the full republican conference for ratification . if the conference rejects the leader's nominee , the speaker or minority leader has the authority to submit another name to the conference . all other standing committee chairs or ranking minority members are nominated by the republican steering committee and ratified by the full republican conference . pursuant to conference rules , the member nominated to be chair or ranking minority member does not need to be the member with the longest continuous service on the committee . in recent congresses , the steering committee "interviewed" prospective candidates for chair or ranking slots . some of the new chairs and ranking members have been the most senior members of the committee , others were not .