he was sentenced to 30 months in prison . the disclosures came to light after defense counsel for certain high - value detainees at the u.s . naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , filed classified papers in connection with military commission trials that included photographs of the agents . investigators concluded that the detainees' defense team had not violated any statute . wolf claimed to have revealed the names of over 2,000 cia officers . he also provided addresses , phone numbers , license tag numbers , and colors of the automobiles of some alleged intelligence agents . these disclosures set the stage for the consideration and passage of the intelligence identities protection act . the intelligence identities protection act provides criminal penalties for the intentional , unauthorized disclosure of information identifying a covert agent with knowledge that the information identifies a covert agent as such and that the united states is taking affirmative measures to conceal the covert agent's foreign intelligence relationship to the united states . covert agents include officers and employees of a u.s. intelligence agency ( including military officers assigned to an intelligence agency ) whose identities as such are classified and who are serving ( or have served within the last five years ) outside the united states ; as well as a u.s. citizen residing abroad ( or working for certain fbi components within the united states ) or a foreign national anywhere , who acts as an informant , agent , or source to an intelligence agency , and whose relationship with the u.s. government is classified . the act prescribes punishments for disclosing the identities of covert agents with increasing severity according to the level of access to classified information the offender exploited . offenders without authorized access to classified information are subject to punishment only if they participated in a pattern of activity designed to discover and reveal the identities of covert agents and have reason to believe that such disclosure will harm u.s. intelligence operations . to date , there have been no reported cases interpreting the statute , but it did result in two convictions pursuant to guilty pleas . in 1985 , sharon scranage , a former cia clerk , pleaded guilty for providing classified information regarding u.s. intelligence operations in ghana to a ghanaian agent with whom she was romantically involved . she was initially sentenced to five years in prison , but a federal judge reduced her sentence to two years in light of the relatively lenient treatment received by the ghanaian agent , who was sentenced to 20 years after pleading no contest to espionage but was soon thereafter returned to ghana as part of a spy exchange . in 2012 , a former cia officer pleaded guilty to one count of violating the iipa for having given the names of two covert agents to two journalists . the defendant , john kiriakou , was initially charged under the espionage act , 18 u.s.c . section 793 , as well , but these charges were dropped as part of the plea agreement . the 111 th congress increased the penalties for violations by persons with access to classified information ( p.l .