these agencies include , but are not limited to the u.s . the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-296 ) consolidated most federal agencies operating along the u.s. borders within the newly formed dhs . most of these agencies were located in the directorate of border and transportation security ( bts ) , which was charged with securing the borders ; territorial waters ; terminals ; waterways ; and air , land , and sea transportation systems of the united states ; and managing the nation's ports of entry . in fy2010 , ice appropriations totaled $5.44 billion , and the agency had approximately 20,134 fte employees . unlike cbp , whose jurisdiction is confined to law enforcement activities along the border , ice special agents investigate immigrations and customs violations in the interior of the united states . ice's mandate includes uncovering national security threats such as weapons of mass destruction or potential terrorists , identifying criminal aliens for removal , probing immigration - related document and benefit fraud , investigating work - site immigration violations , exposing alien and contraband smuggling operations , interdicting narcotics shipments , and detaining illegal immigrants and ensuring their departure ( or removal ) from the united states . ice is also responsible for the collection , analysis and dissemination of strategic and tactical intelligence data pertaining to homeland security , infrastructure protection , and the illegal movement of people , money , and cargo within the united states . the coast guard was incorporated into dhs as a standalone agency by p.l . the coast guard's overall mission is to protect the public , the environment , and u.s. economic interests in maritime regions — at the nation's ports and waterways , along the coast , and in international waters . the coast guard is thus the nation's principal maritime law enforcement authority and the lead federal agency for the maritime component of homeland security , including port security . among other things , the coast guard is responsible for evaluating , boarding , and inspecting commercial ships as they approach u.s. waters ; countering terrorist threats in u.s. ports ; and for helping to protect u.s. navy ships in u.s. ports . a high - ranking coast guard officer in each port area serves as the captain of the port and is the lead federal official responsible for the security and safety of the vessels and waterways in their geographic zone . in fy2010 , coast guard appropriated budget authority totaled $10.14 billion , and the agency had approximately 49,954 fte military and civilian employees . as part of operation noble eagle ( military operations in homeland defense and civil support to u.s. federal , state and local agencies ) , the coast guard is at a heightened state of alert protecting more than 361 ports and 95,000 miles of coastline .