successive u.s . administrations have viewed the good friday agreement as the best framework for a lasting peace in northern ireland . the clinton administration was instrumental in helping the parties forge the agreement , and the george w. bush administration strongly backed its full implementation . u.s. officials welcomed the end to the ira's armed campaign in 2005 and the restoration of the devolved government in 2007 . the obama administration remained engaged in the peace process . in october 2009 , then - u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton visited northern ireland , addressed the assembly , and urged northern ireland's leaders to reach an agreement on devolving policing and justice powers . in february 2010 , president obama welcomed the resulting hillsborough agreement . in june 2013 , president obama visited northern ireland in the context of a g8 summit meeting and noted that the united states would always "stand by" northern ireland . the obama administration welcomed the conclusion of both the december 2014 stormont house agreement and the november 2015 fresh start agreement . like its predecessors , the trump administration has offered support and encouragement to northern ireland . in march 2017 , vice president mike pence noted that , "the advance of peace and prosperity in northern ireland is one of the great success stories of the past 20 years" and paid tribute to senator mitchell and his role in the peace process . in november 2017 , the state department spokesperson expressed regret at the impasse in discussions to restore northern ireland's power - sharing institutions , urged continued dialogue , and asserted that the united states remained "ready to support efforts that ensure full implementation of the good friday agreement and subsequent follow - on cross - party agreements. many members of congress have actively supported the peace process for decades . encouraged by progress on police reforms , several members prompted the bush administration in december 2001 to lift a ban on contacts between the federal bureau of investigation and the new psni . congress had initiated this prohibition in 1999 because of the former ruc's human rights record . more recently , congressional hearings have focused on the peace process , policing reforms , human rights , and the status of public inquiries into several past murders in northern ireland in which collusion between the security forces and paramilitary groups is suspected ; these murders have included the 1989 slaying of belfast attorney patrick finucane and the 1997 killing of raymond mccord , jr . some members of congress have urged the trump administration to name a special envoy for northern ireland to signal that the united states remains committed to the region , especially in light of the stalemate in reestablishing the devolved government . on the economic front , the united states is an important source of investment for northern ireland . according to one study , foreign direct investment by u.s. - based companies in northern ireland totaled £1.48 billion ( nearly $2.1 billion ) between 2003-2004 and 2015-2016 and was responsible for creating 13,875 jobs .