summary of current ffrdcs 1 . parts of the faa's ffrdc also are identified as a study and analysis center and a systems engineering center . section 305 of the act states that "the secretary , actingthrough theundersecretary for science and technology , may establish or contract with one or more ffrdcs to carry out otherresponsibilities ofthe act , including the coordination and integration of the agency's extramural and intermural research programs. ( 7 ) section 312directs the secretary of dhs to establish an ffrdc known as the homeland security institute . according to thelegislation , theinstitute , among other things , "should conduct systems analysis , risk analysis , and simulation and modeling todeterminevulnerability of the nation's critical infrastructure. ( 8 ) however , the legislation also states that "the institute shall terminate threeyears after the effective date of this act. some have raised concerns that this provision could make it difficult fordhs to recruit thebest people for this center . this legislative language provides the secretary of homeland security with the authority the agency needs to establish multipleffrdcs , as long as the department complies with ofpp letter 84-1 , and the implementing far 35.017-2 . oncethese requirementshave been met , the dhs can develop a request for proposals to establish one or more ffrdcs . it should be notedthat thecompetition in contracting act ( cica ) permits the government to use sole - source procedures to establish or sustainan ffrdc.proponents of this practice contend this allows the government to select the highest quality bid , rather than thelowest cost bid thatapplies to traditional federal procurement actions . however , to help control costs , congress can set ceilings on thetotal annualspending and / or established personnel levels for the center . in addition to universities and private sector firms,existing ffrdcs canalso compete to operate and manage a dhs sponsored ffrdc , if the mission of the proposed ffrdcis similar to the existingffrdc . ffrdcs operate under a five year contract , with a review of the center's performance by the sponsoringagency after thethird year of operation . this review is to determine if the ffrdc should be renewed for another 5 years,re - competed as an ffrdc,abolished , or decertified as an ffrdc while continuing to operate as an independent nonprofit organization . once the dhs selects the organization that will administer and operate an ffrdc , the board of trustees for the ffrdc willestablish operating procedures , and select the director of the ffrdc . ( 9 ) while the sponsoring agency has some input in the selectionof the center's director , the board of trustees is ultimately responsible for selecting the director of the ffrdc.the director is thenresponsible for hiring the remainder of the center's personnel who , like the director , are employees of theorganization that operatesthe ffrdc , not the sponsoring federal agency . the primary objective of this unique arrangement between thesponsoring agency andthe center is to help ensure the independence of the center while concomitantly establishing a long - term , closepartnershiprelationship , as opposed to the "arms length" required with for - profit federal contracts .