ge labeling in brazil . brazil's food labeling regulation for products containingge ingredients took effect on december 31 , 2001 . ( 18 ) the law mandates the labeling of all foods for human consumption when morethan 4% of the ingredients are derived from ge commodities . subsequent applications have not succeeded . ( 6 ) in brazil , thecommercial status of ge soybeans ( and ge crops in general ) remains in dispute in the courts and no patents on rrtechnology havebeen issued . the status of ge soybeans in brazil is particularly important to international oilseed markets sincebrazil representsessentially the last potential major source for non - ge soybeans to world markets . although rr soybean seeds are not patented in argentina , monsanto has agreements with other seed firms in argentina allowingthem to use the rr technology in their seeds . as a result , argentine farmers have access to and have increasinglyswitched to rrsoybean varieties . in 2001 , about 90% of argentina's soybean crop was planted to rr varieties . ( 7 ) the rr share of the 2003 crop isnearly 100% , according to news reports . an argentine seed law ( act no . 20247 ; 1973 ) requires that all seeds must be certified for commercial use . however , argentinefarmers have reportedly ignored this law and routinely save rr soybean seeds for planting or resale . since thegovernment does notenforce this law , a large black market for rr soybeans in argentina has developed that keeps seed prices low anddiscourages anyattempts by monsanto or licensed companies to assess technology fees on rr soybeans . according to monsanto,it is not feasible tocharge a technology fee on soybean seeds in argentina without patent protection . ( 8 ) as a result , argentine farmers save about $8 to $9per metric ton on the technology fee . ( 9 ) this is aconsiderable cost advantage over u.s. soybeans in a highly competitive internationalsoybean market . in september 1998 , the brazilian biosafety commission ( ctnbio ) , acting under government authority , approved the commercialplanting of rr soybeans . two major groups opposed to the use of ge crops - - greenpeace and the brazilianconsumer defenseinstitute - - immediately filed lawsuits in brazilian courts challenging the ctnbio approval . in 1999 a lower courtissued aninjunction suspending the ctnbio approval of commercial planting of rr soybeans before any approvedcommercial plantingactually occurred . the case was appealed to a three - judge panel of the brasilia appeals court , where it haslanguished . in february2002 , the lead judge of the three - judge appellate court publicly announced in favor of commercial planting of rrsoybeans . however , a majority of the three - judge panel has yet to render a decision on the commercial use of rr soybeans . as a result , itremains illegal to plant ge soybeans in brazil . however , brazilian farmers are aware of the benefits of rrsoybeans and havereportedly smuggled seeds into brazil from argentina's black market . despite the lack of government approval,80% of the crop inthe southernmost state of rio grande do sul is estimated to be planted to rr soybean varieties .