as for specifically how many we have , that is a secret. it is possible that pakistani scientist a.q . khan may have provided north korea the same chinese - origin nuclear weapon design he provided to libya . if so , this might help north korea develop a reliable warhead for ballistic missiles—small , light and robust enough to tolerate the extreme conditions encountered through a ballistic trajectory . although former dia director jacoby told the senate armed services committee in april 2005 that north korea had the capability to arm a missile with a nuclear device , pentagon officials later backtracked from that assessment . most estimates of nuclear weapon stockpiles are based on estimated fissile material production . factors in plutonium production include the average power level of the reactor ; days of operation ; how much of the fuel is reprocessed and how quickly , and how much plutonium is lost in production processes . according to north korea , the 5mwe reactor performed poorly early on , unevenly irradiating the rods . there is no data on the reactor's current performance or the reprocessing facility's efficiency . north korea told the iaea that during the 1990 "hot test," it lost almost 30% of the plutonium in the waste streams . a key consideration is whether or not the reprocessing plant can run continuously , since frequent shutdowns can lead to plutonium losses . according to north korean officials in january 2004 , the plant annual throughput is 110 tons of spent fuel , about twice the fuel load of the 5mwe reactor . environmental clues suggest that the device used plutonium . by comparison , a simple plutonium implosion device normally would produce a larger blast , perhaps 5 to 20 kilotons . the first nuclear tests conducted by other states range from 9 kt ( pakistan ) to 60kt , but tests by the united states , china , britain and russia were in the 20kt - range . implosion devices , which use sophisticated lenses of high explosives to compress fissile material , are generally thought to require testing , although the cia suggested in 2003 that north korea could validate its weapons design using extensive high explosives testing . a final factor in assessing how many weapons north korea can produce is whether north korea's technical sophistication enables it to use more or less material than the international standards of 8kg of pu and 25kg for heu per weapon . north korea's abilities here are unknown . secretary of state powell stated in december 2002 that "we now believe they [north koreans] have a couple of nuclear weapons and have had them for years. on february 10 , 2005 , north korea announced that it had manufactured "nukes" for self - defense and that it would bolster its nuclear weapons arsenal . in june 2005 , vice foreign minister kim gye gwan told abc news that "we have enough nuclear bombs to defend against a u.s. attack . information about north korea's nuclear weapons production has depended on remote monitoring and defector information , with mixed results . satellite images correctly indicated the start - up of the 5mwe reactor , but gave no details about its operations .