potential successors . the leading contenders to succeed qaboos include three brothers who are cousins of the sultan and whose sister was the woman who was briefly married to qaboos . they are minister of heritage and culture sayyid haythim bin tariq al said , whom some assess indecisive ; asad bin tariq al said , a former military officer who has the title "representative of the sultan" and was appointed deputy prime minister for international relations and cooperation affairs in early 2017 ; and shihab bin tariq al said , the former commander of oman's navy . another potential choice is fahd bin mahmud , above . under sultan qaboos , oman has pursued a foreign policy that sometimes diverges from that of oman's gcc allies saudi arabia and the uae . oman has generally sought to mediate resolution of regional conflicts and refrain from direct military involvement in them . oman joined the u.s. - led coalition against the islamic state , but did not conduct any airstrikes against that group . oman did not join the saudi - led arab coalition fighting the iran - backed houthi forces in yemen and is one of the countries seeking to negotiate a solution to that conflict . oman did not supply forces to the gcc's "peninsula shield" 2011 deployment to bahrain to help the al khalifa regime counter the uprising there . oman strongly opposed the saudi - led move in june 2017 to isolate qatar over a number of policy disagreements . oman's top diplomat yusuf alawi has visited washington , dc , several times , most recently in late july 2018 , in part to work with u.s. officials seeking to resolve the rift . omani diplomats were hopeful that the annual gcc summit during december 5-6 , 2017 , would make progress on the dispute , but that meeting adjourned on december 5 , 2017 , after only two hours of talks . qaboos , primarily because of his fragile health , has not attended any of the annual gcc summits since 2013 . oman opposed a 2012 saudi proposal for political unity among the gcc states as a signal of gcc solidarity against the iran , even threatening to withdraw from the gcc if the plan were adopted . other gcc leaders are similarly concerned about surrendering any of their sovereignty , and the plan has not been dropped entirely but neither has it advanced . in 2007 , oman was virtually alone within the gcc in balking at a plan to form a monetary union . lingering border disputes also have plagued oman - uae relations ; the two finalized their borders in 2008 , nearly a decade after a tentative border settlement in 1999 . sultan qaboos , who is sandhurst - educated , is respected by his fellow gulf rulers as a defense strategist . he has long asserted that the united states is the security guarantor of the region . oman's approximately 43,000-person armed force — collectively called the "sultan of oman's armed forces" — is the third largest of the gcc states and widely considered one of the best trained .