strategic management of human capital . the office of personnel management ( opm ) defined this initiative as transforming how the federal government employs , deploys , develops , and evaluates its workforce by focusing on results . discussion in the fy 2007 budget suggested that with this initiative agencies "are strengthening their performance appraisal systems , nurturing future leaders , ensuring their employees have the necessary skills , and reducing how long it takes them to hire new staff. competitive sourcing entailed public - private competitions for federal activities considered commercial and possible contracting out to the private sector of work currently performed by federal employees , and related revisions of omb circular a - 76 . improved financial performance sought to enhance the quality and timeliness of financial information available to the agencies and congress when making decisions about federal programs . two other facets originally subsumed under this initiative later were designated as separate program initiatives — improving management of real property assets and eliminating improper payments . expanded electronic government focused on strengthening agencies' management of information technology resources and using the internet to improve service delivery . the latter effort involved some two dozen activities , such as govbenefits.gov and grants.gov . performance improvement ( formerly budget and performance integration ) involved efforts to integrate performance reviews with budget decisions in the federal government . increasingly , agencies are to use program performance information such as that generated by the program assessment rating tool ( part ) when making budget and management decisions . president bush's budget submission for fy2003 sought to incorporate the five management initiatives into agencies' budgets , and introduced a management scorecard to measure progress in each of the five reform areas . grades for the agencies , based on a traffic light motif of green for success , yellow for mixed results , and red for unsatisfactory , were updated quarterly by omb , through december 31 , 2008 . for each initiative , there were multiple "standards for success," or core criteria , which an agency had to meet in order to get a green rating . there were likewise listings for each initiative of conditions amounting to "fatal flaws" ; if an agency displayed any one of these , it received red . a yellow grade applied when an agency became free of red conditions and had achieved some but not all of the core criteria . for example , with respect to the improving financial performance initiative , an agency had to meet four core criteria to "get to green" as listed in the fy2003 budget submission: financial management systems meet federal system requirements and applicable federal accounting and transaction standards as reported by the agency head ; accurate and timely financial information ; integrated financial and performance management systems supporting day - to - day operations ; and unqualified and timely audit opinion on the annual financial statements ; no material internal control weaknesses reported by the auditors . as of december 31 , 2008 , four agencies — department of labor , department of state , environmental protection agency , and the social security administration — had attained green for all five initiatives .