the oaa amendments of 2006 ( p.l . 109-365 ) authorized appropriations for oaa - funded activities , including the ltc ombudsman program , through fy2011 ( authorizations of appropriations expired on september 30 , 2011 ) . however , congress has continued to appropriate funding for oaa - authorized activities for fy2012 through fy2015 . the 114 th congress may choose to reauthorize the oaa . in doing so , federal policymakers may consider amending or deleting existing authorities under the act or establishing new authorities , including those under the ltc ombudsman program . in addition , congress will likely consider annual appropriations for ltc ombudsman program activities , as well as appropriations for authorities under the elder justice act enacted in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) that support the ltc ombudsman program . this report briefly describes the ltc ombudsman program's legislative history , administrative function and other activities , and funding . the report presents program data related to funding sources and types of facilities funded in 2013 , the most recent year for which data are available . the report also provides findings from an institute of medicine ( iom ) evaluation of the ltc ombudsman program and other studies related to the program . finally , it identifies further issues for congress to consider regarding the ltc ombudsman program . the appendix summarizes provisions that would amend the ltc ombudsman program under the older americans act reauthorization act of 2015 ( s. 192 ) . the ombudsman demonstration project was created in 1972 as a public health service ( phs ) demonstration project in five states . variation in the organizational placement of ombudsman programs exists partly because the oaa gives each state discretion in determining many aspects of the ombudsman program . for example , states can decide where ombudsman programs may be located organizationally within the state , whether enabling legislation should be passed at the state level , and whether additional funding will be made available through state and local sources . these differences mean that the structure , operation , and effectiveness of ombudsman programs vary from state to state . moreover , certain characteristics and features of state ltc ombudsman programs , by design , make the program different than other oaa programs and services , such as the ombudsman program's independence , strict disclosure requirements , and the responsibility to designate staff and volunteers to serve as representatives . while these unique features and state variation exist , there has been concern among policymakers and other stakeholders that these features have led to inconsistent interpretation of oaa provisions and ultimately issues of compliance . to provide needed clarification of the responsibilities set forth under the oaa , as well as to address state variation in how oaa statute is interpreted , aoa published a final rule for state ltc ombudsman programs on february 11 , 2015 , after a notice of proposed rulemaking and public comment period . since placement of the ltc ombudsman program under title vii of the act in 1992 , minimal regulations regarding the program's operation existed .