the lisbon treaty is the result of these efforts . in january 2007 , as germany took over the six - month eu presidency , europe remained in what some analysts called a "period of reflection" — a condition of stasis born in the uncertainty that followed the rejection of the constitutional treaty . german chancellor angela merkel made reviving the stalled reform process one of her key priorities , seeking a new treaty deal that would institute crucial reforms . analysts say that merkel received a key assist with the may 2007 election of nicolas sarkozy as president of france: sarkozy shared merkel's goal of reviving the constitutional treaty in some form , at least in part to restore france's role as a leader in europe following its 2005 "no" vote . germany and others that had ratified the constitutional treaty wanted to preserve as much of the original document as possible . however , some changes were considered necessary in order to address concerns raised by french and dutch voters , as well as to satisfy countries such as the uk , which sought to protect its national sovereignty in some areas , and poland , which wanted more voting weight in the council of ministers . after contentious negotiations at the june 2007 eu summit , eu leaders announced the outlines of a new "reform treaty" that would amend , rather than replace , the existing eu treaties . eu leaders also dropped the term "constitution," given that it had become negatively associated in some countries with creating an eu "superstate. after working out the text at a july 2007 intergovernmental conference , eu leaders met in lisbon and signed the new treaty in december 2007 . analysts assessed that over 90% of the substance of the constitutional treaty had been preserved in the lisbon treaty . as an amendment to existing treaties , eu leaders sought to present the new document as one that would be ratified by parliaments , thereby avoiding the risks of public referendums . however , ireland is required by its national law to hold a public vote on any major change to the eu rules . eu officials initially hoped that the lisbon treaty would be ratified by all 27 member states and enter into force before the june 2009 european parliament elections , but rejection of the treaty in ireland's june 2008 referendum threw the timetable for adoption into disarray . these countries have committed to a process of integration by harmonizing laws and adopting common policies on an extensive range of issues . notable areas of shared sovereignty include a customs union ; a common trade policy ; a single market in which goods , people , and capital move freely ; a common currency ( the euro ) that is used by 17 member states ; and many aspects of social and environmental policy . eu member states have also taken significant steps in the development of a common foreign and security policy ( cfsp ) and closer police and judicial cooperation .