shevardnadze's ouster . russian foreign minister igor ivanov mediated between opposition leaders andshevardnadze on the evening of november 23 in the face of saakashvili's threat to storm the president's residence . reportedly with u.s. concurrence , ivanovstressed to shevardnadze that he should not risk civil war by resorting to force against the opposition , but shouldnegotiate a settlement , presumably to includenew legislative elections ( washington post , nov. 25 ; see below for an alternative explanation ) . alsocritical to shevardnadze's decision to resign were reportsthat top defense , security , and internal ( police ) officials - - whom shevardnadze stated he would rely on to suppressthe protests - - told him that they would notaccept such orders . faced with this lack of support , shevardnadze and the opposition leaders reached agreementon his resignation . saakashvili hailed thiscoup a "rose revolution" to signify that it had not been violent . in a speech to the country on november 24 , acting president burjanadze called for order to be re - established and for presidential elections within aconstitutionally - mandated 45 days . she directed that the prorogued 1999 legislature would resume its work untilnew legislative elections could be held . shequickly met with security officials , and tedo japaridze ( who broke with shevardnadze during the crisis ) wasconfirmed as secretary of the presidential securitycouncil ( composed of the heads of the security ministries ) . he later was named foreign minister . she also declaredthat georgia would continue its existingforeign policy aimed at integration with europe and nato . the georgian constitutional court the next day lentsome legitimacy to the coup and plans fornew elections by ruling that the november 2 election was a fraud . cep - 274 ; transitions online , nov.3 ) . it was anticipated that the new pro - presidential legislature would elect a kindred politician as speaker , a crucialpost in the run - up to the 2005 presidentialrace . the speaker becomes the interim head of state in case the president resigns or dies . according to thisspeculation , abashidze , with tacit russian militarybacking , aimed to assume the speakership and perhaps later the presidency . all the political players in the crisis seemed intent on avoiding a repeat of the bloody 1992 coup that toppled independent georgia's first president . the threeprincipal opposition leaders agreed on power - sharing and quickly moved to reaffirm or appoint able individuals tothe critical finance , foreign , and defenseministries . nonetheless , some observers warn that there is no pre - eminent political figure behind which the countrycan rally , so factional disputes couldeventually lead to violence . some observers argue that saakashvili's personal volatility may not make him apresident able to unify and bring stability togeorgia ( institute for advanced strategic and political studies , policy briefings , nov. 19 ; thedaily telegraph , nov. 24 ) . some observers warn thatindependent georgia has witnessed frequent violence and uprisings by military and paramilitary groups . saakashvili , concerned about rumors that reactionarygroups might be mobilizing , on november 28 urged the avoidance of bloodshed but also threatened that "we willdeal with [armed attacks] mercilessly" ( fbis ,nov. 28 , doc . cep - 282 ) .