amendments in p.l . 105-185 extended the period of food stamp / supplemental security income ( ssi ) / medicaid ( but not temporary assistance for needy families ) eligibility for refugees and asylees from five to seven years and added cuban and haitian entrants to those eligible for these benefits for seven years . as noted above , u.s. citizens and lprs have family in haiti for whom they have petitioned for visas to become lprs in the united states . according to the dos , there were 105,193 haitians who had approved petitions to immigrate to the united states at the end of fy2010 . last year , the government of canada established the haiti special measures program to expedite the processing of haitians with family members in canada and reported processing more than five times the number of applications in 2010 than were processed in 2009 for the same time frame . some have called on dhs secretary napolitano to use the humanitarian parole authority under the ina to allow haitians with approved visa petitions to enter the united states without waiting for visas to become available . those opposed to expediting the admission of haitians argue that it would not be fair to other foreign nationals waiting to reunite with their families . the cholera outbreak , which cdc confirmed on october 21 , 2010 , has renewed appeals to congress to enact legislation that would expedite the admission of haitians with family in the united states . although some concerns are being raised about the possible spread of cholera by haitians coming to the united states , others point out that medical examinations and health screenings are core features of u.s. immigration policy . supporters of the current policy assert that expediting the admission of haitians would not be in the u.s. national interest at this time , especially given the cholera outbreak . there are concerns that the ongoing crisis in haiti may result in mass migration from the country . not only has there been massive displacement of people caused by the earthquake , but observers of the situation warn of potential and widespread lawlessness as well as outbreaks of disease . these health , safety , and security factors — individually or in combination — could trigger an exodus of haitians seeking refuge in nearby countries , including the united states . moreover , the unexpected return to haiti on january 16 , 2011 , of jean - claude "baby doc" duvalier , the dictator deposed 25 years ago , has heightened fears that political turmoil may ensue . the practice of haitians fleeing by the thousands began when duvalier was dictator . at least five federal agencies now handle haitian migrants: dhs's coast guard ( interdiction ) ; customs and border protection ( apprehensions and inspections ) ; immigration and customs enforcement ( detention ) ; u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( credible fear determination ) ; and doj's eoir ( asylum and removal hearings ) . dhs would take the lead in handling a potential mass migration and has long had a set of operational plans in place to respond to such a situation .