this is not the case , however . the unavailability of alaskannatural gas through the pipeline leads to price increases in the naturalgas market . the 108th congress hasincluded in h.r . 6 , the omnibus energy bill , provisions which provide incentives for the construction of analaska natural gas pipeline . a pipeline would link currentlyunavailable alaskan gas supplies to the consuming market . this report analyzes the possible expansion orcontraction of natural gas imports as a result of constructing , or notconstructing , an alaskan pipeline , within the framework of the national energy modeling system ( nems ) . ( 1 ) nems is used by the eia as a tool to forecast futureenergy trends asincluded in the aeo . ( 2 ) recently , the eia haspublished analyses of a variety of restricted natural gas supply scenarios including the non - availability of an alaskanatural gas pipeline . the aeo reference case forecast is the eia's baseline estimate of the state of energy markets in the out years to 2025 . ( 4 ) the reference case forecast projects naturalgas prices to be highenough after 2009 to begin construction of an alaska natural gas pipeline . ( 5 ) in the forecast , natural gas deliveries come on stream from a pipeline in 2018with full capacity deliveriesbecoming available near the end of the forecast period , in 2024 . if policy based incentives to construct a pipelinebecome available , it is possible that a pipeline might be constructedsooner than in the aeo reference case altering the results presented in this report . as a result of the constructionand delivery time line assumed in the reference case , the forecasts withand without the construction of a pipeline are virtually identical until 2018 . this report will examine differencesin the forecasts for the years 2020 and 2025 . ( 6 ) to focus on the international trade effects of the pipeline , likely variations in the current account balance in 2020 and 2025 will be calculated . the current account balance is a basicmeasure of a nation's foreign trade position and is defined as the nation's exports of goods and services minus thenation's imports of goods and services . when a nation's exportsexceed its imports , the country has a current account surplus . when a nation's imports exceed its exports , the nationhas a current account deficit . the eia forecasts do not includeestimates of the cost of constructing the pipeline , or any trade effects that might come about as a result of sourcingdecisions for the steel and other goods and services used in theconstruction process . the current account balance effects described in this report are limited to the natural gas thata pipeline would deliver to the market . in the aeo reference case , an alaska natural gas pipeline is expected to deliver approximately 2 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) , about 7% of yearly consumption , of gas per year by the time itreaches full capacity operation in 2024 . although deliveries are forecast to begin in 2018 , they are expected to beginat approximately 0.8 tcf per year and grow to full capacity .