, soft money . in a 2 to 1 split,the mcconnell v. fec court ruled that section 323 ( a ) is constitutional only to the extent that it bansnational party committees from using nonfederal funds for public communicationsthat "refer" to a clearly identified federal candidate - - "regardless of whether a candidate for state or local office isalso mentioned or identified" - - and that "promotes or supports" or"attacks or opposes" a candidate for that office , "regardless of whether the communication expressly advocates avote for or against a candidate. ( 16 ) section 101 of bcra creates another new feca provision , section 323 ( b ) , which prohibits state and local parties from using nonfederal funds ( or soft money ) for "federal electionactivities. section 301 ( 20 ) ( a ) of feca , as amended by bcra , defines "federal election activities" to include: ( i ) voter registration drives in the last 120 days of a federal election ; ( ii ) voter identification , get - out - the - vote ( gotv ) drives , and generic activity in connection with an election in whicha federal candidate is on the ballot ; ( iii ) public communications that"refer" to a clearly identified federal candidate - - "regardless of whether a candidate for state or local office is alsomentioned or identified" - - and that "promotes or supports" or"attacks or opposes" a candidate for that office , "regardless of whether the communication expressly advocates avote for or against a candidate" ; or ( iv ) services by a state or local partyemployee who spends at least 25% of paid time in a month on activities in connection with a federal election . ( 17 ) the mcconnell v. fec three - judgecourt ruled that section 323 ( b ) offeca , as amended by bcra , is constitutional only as applied to section 301 ( 20 ) ( a ) ( iii ) activities . that is,according to the court , state and local parties are prohibited from spendingnonfederal or soft money on public communications that "refer" to a clearly identified federal candidate - - "regardless of whether a candidate for state or local office is also mentionedor identified" - - and that "promotes or supports" or "attacks or opposes" a candidate for that office , "regardless ofwhether the communication expressly advocates a vote for or against acandidate. ( 18 ) raising and spending of soft money by federal officeholders and candidates . section 101 of bcra prohibits , with few exceptions,federal officeholders and candidates from soliciting , receiving , directing , transferring , or spending nonfederal or softmoney for any local , state , or federal election . ( 19 ) the mcconnell v.fec court upheld the constitutionality of this section of the statute in its entirety . section 318 of bcra prohibits minors ( defined as persons 17 and younger ) from makingcontributions or donations to candidates or to a political party . ( 27 ) in mcconnell v. fec , the three - judge court unanimously held the prohibition to beunconstitutional . raising and spending of soft money by political parties .