likelihood of use . the debate over whether the new nuclear weapons concepts arebetter suited to warfighting or deterrence follows from a more fundamental debate over how to make deterrencecredible . this debate surfaced frequentlyduring the cold war , when the united states sought to deter not only a soviet nuclear attack on the united statesbut also a conventional attack by the sovietunion or its allies against u.s. allies . many analysts consider this issue to be even more relevant now , when theunited states might seek to use its nucleardeterrent in contingencies with more specific and limited goals against an adversary who possesses few or nonuclear weapons . the bush administration plansto develop a more focused nuclear war - fighting capability for the united states , one that includes an improvedability to destroy hardened and deeply buriedtargets and other capabilities in a number of nations that might threaten the united states . it has stated that theseplans and capabilities would make nuclear use less likely because it would make the u.s. deterrent more credible and robust . ( 9 ) critics of the administration's policy question this contention . many analysts doubt that leaders of smaller , non - nuclear countries will view any u.s. threat touse nuclear weapons as credible , regardless of the yield or capability of u.s. nuclear weapons . if they do not believethe united states will strike with nuclearweapons , then they would not be deterred by the threat . others argue that the united states can credibly threatenany nation , and therefore deter or defeat thatnation , with its conventional forces . they believe this eliminates any requirement for new and improved nuclearweapons . and some analysts questionwhether nuclear threats against specific , and possibly remote facilities , will deter leaders in smaller , rogue nations . credible deterrence vs . these leaders may believe they can absorb asmall nuclear strike from the united states and still achieve their war aims . critics of the administration's policy , therefore , fear that by developing nuclear weapons for battlefield uses , the united states may be more likely to use thesesystems in a conflict . they worry that this would be particularly true if the adversary could not strike back againstthe united states with nuclear weapons , asthe soviet union could . these analysts fear that , as time passes , as the memories of the horrors of nuclear use fadeand as concerns about the horrors ofchemical and biological weapons increase , u.s. officials may begin to believe that the unilateral use of nuclearweapons by the united states represents the lesshorrible outcome for the united states than the alternative where an adversary uses chemical or biological weaponsagainst u.s. interests . the bush administration has stated that nuclear weapons will play a role in u.s. security policy for the foreseeable future . but , under the1968 nuclearnon - proliferation treaty , the united states has pledged to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. securitypolicy . rs21619 - - nuclear weapons and u.s. national security: a need for new weapons programs ? critics , however , arguethat the u.s. approach may undermine u.s. efforts to discourage nuclear proliferation .