questions as to the effectiveness of uavs persist . although "homeland security officials praised the ( uavs ) as a safe and important tool that … has contributed to the seizing of more than 22,000 pounds of marijuana and the apprehension of 5,000 illegal immigrants," others disagree . the fy2006 dhs appropriations act ( p.l . 108-90 ) provided $35.2 million to establish a northern border air wing and tasked the dhs under secretary of border and transportation security to devise a report outlining operational plans by which the air and marine operations center ( amoc ) would eliminate surveillance gaps affecting the northern border and western united states . the act also provided $10 million for the use of uavs . 108-334 , the fy2006 homeland security appropriations act , provided another $10 million for uavs in border security . 109-295 provided $20 million in fy2007 for dhs's use of uavs . 110-161 provided $14.7 million in fy2008 for the operation and maintenance of uavs . in fy2009 , congress did not specify the amount of funding a&m should put toward uavs . the supplemental appropriations bill of fy2010 ( h.r . 4899 ) would include $32 million for the acquisition of two additional uavs by a&m . in response to these congressional mandates , dhs has tested and used uavs to surveil the u.s. - mexican border since june 2004 in certain border sectors . the uav demonstrations conducted by various commercial companies at fort huachuca and gila bend , az , on behalf of cbp have prompted various questions regarding their potential use within the united states that will be addressed subsequently . the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . 110-161 ) directed dhs to explore the use of uavs in the marine environment in addition to the border , and appropriated $15 million for dhs's uav program , resulting in the modified "guardian" predator b uav . additionally , the dhs conference report to the fy2008 act directed dhs to work with other federal agencies , including the faa , to "evaluate the appropriateness of an faa exemption for small scale" uav technology . while congress has demonstrated consistent support for the concept of using uavs in border security , many questions remain regarding their practical employment . as noted , the cost comparison between uavs and manned aircraft is complicated . uavs are less expensive to procure than manned aircraft but may cost more to operate . thus , the life cycle cost of uavs could actually be greater than the life cycle cost of manned aircraft . the disparity in operating the two types of aircraft may be offset by the fact that uavs can remain in the air more than 10 times longer than the helicopters currently being used by a&m to support the usbp . in the past , multiple uavs piloted in close proximity have experienced interference and loss of control between the uav and the remote pilot . in many cases , interference led to accidents . a possible issue for congress could include whether testing should be expanded before any decisions are made regarding the wide - scale use of uavs along the border .