successive u.s . administrations and many members of congress have long viewed european integration as a way to foster democratic allies and strong trading partners in europe . during the cold war , the eu project — and the peace and prosperity it helped to engender in western europe — was considered central to deterring the soviet threat . with the end of the cold war , the united states strongly backed eu efforts to extend the political and economic benefits of membership to central and eastern europe , and it has supported the eu aspirations of turkey and the western balkan states . the united states often looks to the eu for partnership on an extensive range of common foreign policy concerns . although strategic and tactical differences surface periodically , many analysts assert that the united states and the eu have a strong track record of cooperation . the united states and the eu have promoted peace and stability in various regions and countries ( including the balkans , afghanistan , and africa ) , enhanced law enforcement and counterterrorism cooperation , and sought to tackle cross - border challenges , such as cybersecurity . during the obama administration , the two sides worked together to contain iran's nuclear ambitions and address climate change . since 2014 , the united states and the eu also have imposed sanctions on russia ( including those targeting key sectors of the russian economy ) in response to russia's annexation of crimea and its support for separatists in eastern ukraine . at times , the u.s. - eu political relationship has faced serious challenges . u.s. - eu relations hit a historic low in 2003 over the u.s. - led invasion of iraq , which some eu members supported and others strongly opposed . u.s. - eu differences on how best to promote a political settlement to the israeli - palestinian conflict often have posed a stumbling block . data protection and balancing privacy and security also have been key u.s. - eu sticking points for years . frictions on such issues resurfaced following the unauthorized disclosures in 2013 of u.s. surveillance programs and allegations of u.s. intelligence - collection operations in europe . eu worries about u.s. data privacy safeguards put pressure on u.s. - eu information - sharing arrangements , in both law - enforcement and commercial contexts . the obama administration and congress took several steps to try to assuage european data protection concerns and ensure continued u.s. - eu information sharing . nevertheless , some in the eu remain apprehensive about whether u.s. laws and regulations sufficiently protect eu citizens' personal data . despite the ups and downs in u.s. - eu relations over the years , u.s. and eu policymakers alike traditionally have valued the partnership as serving their respective overall strategic and economic interests . given long - standing u.s. support for the eu , many eu leaders have been taken aback by what they perceive as president trump's hostility toward the bloc . president trump has repeatedly singled out the eu's trade practices as harmful to u.s. commercial interests .