108-375 follows . section 3116 ( a ) authorized the secretary of energy , in consultation with the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , to classify tank waste in south carolina and idaho as other than high - level , upon making certain determinations . these determinations are ( 1 ) that the waste "does not require permanent isolation in a deep geological repository," as is required for high - level waste , and ( 2 ) that highly radioactive radionuclides have been removed from the waste to the "maximum extent practical. assuming these requirements are met , the secretary must determine if the radioactivity of the waste will exceed concentration limits for class c low - level waste . however , the waste could be disposed of according to class c performance objectives for human exposure , regardless of whether the concentration exceeds allowable limits . if the concentration does exceed allowable limits , the secretary must consult with the nrc to develop a plan for the disposal of such waste . in any case , disposal also would be subject to a state - approved closure plan and state permit authorized under other law . the performance objectives for class c waste require "reasonable assurances" that concentrations of radioactive materials that may be released into the environment do not result in human exposure to specific levels of radiation . the ability of the grout to accomplish this objective would depend primarily on the extent to which it mixes with the residual waste to prevent leaks from the tank . however , even if a tank leaks , the performance objectives could still be met if the radioactivity decays to allowable levels before contamination migrates and results in human exposure . how to decommission ( i.e. , close ) the tanks in a cost - effective and timely manner that mitigates environmental risk and potential exposure of workers has been the subject of controversy . doe has argued that removing all of the waste in the tanks would take too long to respond to environmental risks from leaking tanks . doe favors removal of the "pumpable" liquid waste and immobilizing ( i.e. , binding up ) the sludge - like residual waste by filling the tanks with a cement grout to prevent leaks . section 3116 ( b ) requires the nrc to monitor doe's implementation of this authority , in coordination with idaho and south carolina . if the nrc determines that doe is not in compliance , it is directed to inform doe , the state , and the congressional committees with relevant jurisdiction . section 3116 ( c ) clarified that the waste classification authority in subsection ( a ) would not apply to any material transported outside of covered states , which are defined as idaho and south carolina in section 3116 ( d ) . in effect , the law does not allow doe to reclassify waste shipped out of south carolina or idaho as "incidental to reprocessing" and to dispose of it as low - level waste in other states . section 3116 ( e ) addressed the effect of the entire section on other laws and regulations and their application within idaho and south carolina .