3553 ( e ) . mandatory minimums implicate considerations under the eighth amendment's cruel and unusual punishments clause . the clause bars mandatory capital punishment statutes . it enjoys only such powers as can be traced to the constitution . all other powers are reserved to the states or to the people . among the powers which the constitution bestows upon congress are the powers to define and punish felonies committed upon the high seas , to exercise exclusive legislative authority over certain federal territories and facilities , to make rules governing the armed forces , to regulate interstate and foreign commerce , and to enact legislation necessary and proper for the execution of those and other constitutionally granted powers . it also grants congress authority to enact legislation "necessary and proper" to the execution of those powers which it vests in congress or in any officer or department of the federal government . many of the federal laws with mandatory minimum sentencing requirements were enacted pursuant to congress's legislative authority over crimes occurring on the high seas or within federal enclaves , or to its power to regulate commerce . when a statute falls for want of legislative authority , the penalties it would impose fall with it . this has yet to occur in the area of mandatory minimum sentences . he may not have more than one criminal history point . he may not have used violence or a dangerous weapon in connection with the offense . he may not have been an organizer or leader of the drug enterprise . he must have provided the government with all the information and evidence at his disposal . finally , the offense may not have resulted in serious injury or death . two - thirds of the judges who responded to the commission's survey favored expanding the safety valve criminal history criterion to encompass those with 2 or 3 criminal history points , although fewer than one quarter favored expansion of the criterion further . some of the commission's hearing witnesses concurred . in the words of united states v. lopez , "[f]irst , congress may regulate the use of the channels of interstate commerce.... second , congress is empowered to regulate and protect the instrumentalities of interstate commerce , or persons or things in interstate commerce , even though the threat may come only from intrastate activities... . finally , congress' commerce authority includes the power to regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce. a few years later , the court reiterated "that congress may [not] regulate noneconomic , violent criminal conduct based solely on that conduct's aggregate effect on interstate commerce . the constitution requires a distinction between what is truly national and what is truly local. yet , purely intrastate activities may have a sufficient impact on interstate commerce to bring them within the reach of congress's commerce clause power . so it is in the case of the controlled substances act where several mandatory minimums are found . the court in comstock provided a hint of the scope of necessary and proper clause . the statute there authorized the attorney general to continue to hold a federal inmate , pending a civil commitment determination , after his scheduled date of release .