conferees with this blanket authority may be called "general conferees. either house or both , however , also may authorize some of its conferees to negotiate only on certain of the matters committed to conference . for example , one chamber might appoint certain of its conferees only to consider title ii of the senate substitute and the corresponding provisions of the house bill . conferees with this form of authority may be called "limited purpose conferees. many limited purpose conferees are named as "additional" conferees , to negotiate along with the general conferees on the specified matters . some , however , may be named as the "sole" conferees on the matters specified ( in which case the authority of all other conferees also must be limited , so that they are not to negotiate on these matters ) . when limited purpose conferees are present , the matters before the conference may be thought of as divided into several portions , on each of which a different group of conferees is authorized to negotiate . the memberships of these different panels of conferees , of course , may overlap . when limited conferees are present , the house and senate determine whether a conference report carries a sufficient number of signatures in different ways . for related information from crs on conference procedures in congress , see the following products available on the crs website , under "congressional operations," at http: / / crs.gov / analysis / pages / congressionaloperations.aspx ? crs report rs20454 , going to conference in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 98-380 , senate conferees: their selection and authority , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs22733 , senate rules restricting the content of conference reports , by [author name scrubbed] . a valid conference report must carry the signatures of a majority of the conferees appointed by each chamber . house precedents state that "to be valid in the house , a conference report must be signed by a majority of the managers of the house and by a majority of the managers of the senate. similarly , senate precedents provide that "[a] conference report to be valid must be signed by a majority of the conferees of each house...." in most cases , no problems arise in determining whether this requirement has been met . under certain circumstances , however , questions may arise about whether a conference report carries sufficient signatures . these questions may arise especially in the house , and when one or both chambers appoint some of their conferees only for limited purposes . usually , each house authorizes at least some of its conferees to negotiate on all the matters in disagreement between the two houses . crs report rs20227 , house conferees: selection , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20219 , house conferees: restrictions on their authority , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 96-708 , conference committee and related procedures: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 98-696 , resolving legislative differences in congress: conference committees and amendments between the houses , by [author name scrubbed] .