, hard money ) . this appears to facilitate the ability of indian tribes to make federal election contributions . that is , while current law limits contributions to a pac to $5,000 per year from any source , a tribe may acquire a large amount of funds for use in federal elections more directly ( i.e. , from its own tribal funds , including , for example , income from tribal enterprises , so long as those enterprises are neither incorporated nor government contractors ) . in one key respect , the fec treats indian tribes differently than pacs . although a 1978 fec ruling had required indian tribes making contributions to comply with the periodic reporting requirements of feca , this requirement was explicitly superceded by a 1995 agency ruling . although contributions from tribes must be reported by recipients , one must view the fec filings of candidates , pacs , and parties in order to track the funds given by an indian tribe , as well as the irs filings by section 527 political organizations . politicalmoneyline found that some $25 million was donated for 2000-20005 federal elections by 212 federally recognized indian tribes , and that the reporting was made under almost 2,000 different variations of their names . thus , the ability to track the flow of election - related money from indian tribes is more difficult than it is for other large entities . several observations may be made about the ability of indian tribes to spend money in federal elections compared with that of other interest groups , which typically operate through pacs . like other interest groups , indian tribes are subject to no aggregate limit on their total federal election contributions ( only individual citizens are subject to this limit ) . unlike an interest group pac , however , an indian tribe may have a more readily available pool of funds that could be used in federal elections , that is , its own tribal funds , as opposed to a fund solely comprised of contributions that are subject to limitations and source restrictions . this advantage , however , may be somewhat offset by the $5,000 per candidate , per election limit applicable to a pac , which typically qualifies as a "multicandidate committee," compared with the $2,300 per candidate , per election limit applicable to all other persons , including indian tribes . ( in one apparent anomaly in feca , a multicandidate committee may only contribute $15,000 per year to the national committee of a political party , whereas any other person , including an indian tribe , may contribute $25,000 , or $28,500 in the 2007-2008 election cycle , adjusted for inflation. ) while "soft money" is not expressly defined in federal election law and regulation , strictly speaking , it refers to funds that are not regulated by feca ( i.e. it may refer to corporate and labor treasury funds that cannot legally be used in connection with federal elections , but can be used for other specified purposes . sometimes referred to as nonfederal funds , prior to the enactment of the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) of 2002 ( p.l .