this is the minimum fee allowed . ( see " the fee formula " section , below. ) blm and fs typically spend more managing their grazing programs than they collect in grazing fees . for example , $79.0 million was appropriated to blm for rangeland management in fy2017 . of that amount , $32.4 million was used for administration of livestock grazing , according to the agency . the remainder was used for other range activities , i ncluding weed management , habitat improvement , and water development . for the same fiscal year , blm collected $18.3 million in grazing fees . the fy2017 appropriation for fs for grazing management was $56.9 million . the funds are used primarily for grazing permit administration and planning . for example , in its 2005 study , gao noted advantages of grazing on private lands over federal lands . they included generally better forage and sources of water ; services provided by private landowners , such as watering , fencing , feeding , veterinary care , and maintenance ; the ability of lessees to sublease , thus generating revenue ; and limited public access . with regard to state lands , the study indicated that states also typically limit public access to their lands , while the quality of forage and the availability of water are more comparable to federal lands . a third factor is whether the federal grazing fee alone or other nonfee costs of operating on federal lands are considered in comparing federal and nonfederal costs . some research suggests that ranchers might spend more to graze on federal lands than private lands when both fee and nonfee costs are considered . nonfee costs relate to maintenance , herding , moving livestock , and lost animals , among other factors . unauthorized grazing occurs on blm and fs lands in a variety of ways , including when cattle graze outside the allowed areas or seasons or in larger numbers than allowed under permit . according to gao , the frequency and extent of unauthorized grazing is not known , because many cases are handled informally by agency staff . however , during the five - year period spanning 2010 to 2014 , blm and fs documented nearly 1,500 instances of unauthorized grazing , some of which involved the livestock owners having to pay penalties and , less frequently , livestock impoundment . in many cases the unauthorized grazing is unintentional , but in other cases livestock owners have intentionally grazed cattle on federal land without getting a permit or paying the required fee . the livestock owners have claimed that they do not need to have permits or pay grazing fees for various reasons , such as that the land is owned by the public ; that the land belongs to a tribe under a treaty ; or that other rights , such as state water rights , extend to the accompanying forage . a particularly long - standing controversy involves cattle grazed by cliven bundy in nevada .