most , however , did not . the aftermath of september 11 further highlighted allied military limitations vis - a - vis the united states . like dci , pcc seeks to improve members' operational capabilities to address evolving defense needs . analysts describe pcc as an attempt to resuscitate dci , which foundered because it was too broad and diffuse . it highlighted other initiatives nato has undertaken to acquire expeditionary assets , singling out in particular airlift , special forces and information superiority , noting that "operations in afghanistan are serving as the principal driver for capability requirements today. it also reemphasized the continuing utility of asset pooling and specialized "niche" capabilities . reading between the lines of nato publications and statements , some analysts sense that there have been real improvements in boosting capabilities . for example , at their june 2005 meeting , nato defense ministers issued a communiqué stating that pcc had "brought some improvements in capabilities , but critical deficiencies persist , particularly in support for our deployed forces. one year later , however , the ministers' statement was more sanguine , noting progress in a number of areas and indicating that they had "provided further guidance on the way ahead. shortly before the riga summit , the alliance issued a media summit guide stating that "[b]y the end of 2008 , over 70 per cent of the 460 or so [pcc] commitments made by allies will have been fulfilled . supporters , meanwhile , also have expressed reservations . some question whether member states , particularly the europeans , will approve sufficient funding in their defense budgets to make the required changes . this has increasingly been the case for countries that have made significant contributions to overseas nato missions , particularly in afghanistan . unless military budgets are increased substantially , the costs of deployment , maintenance , and equipment replacement will likely displace expenditures for modernization . it has also been suggested that the capabilities requirements effectively raise the bar for new members of the alliance . finally , some analysts insist that dci and pcc need to be viewed in the context of the traditional debate over nato burdensharing . shortly after the prague summit , jiri sedivy , director of prague's institute of international relations noted that "[p]eople talk about new members like the czech republic not contributing enough to nato , but what they don't realize is that the western europeans have failed to keep their promises since the 1950s. by focusing on specific , agreed - upon military capability requirements , the alliance hopes to end - run this decades - old problem . pcc is also intended to improve upon dci in light of the security threat that emerged on september 11 . in an effort to combat terrorism , it emphasizes air lift , secure communications , pgms , and protection against weapons of mass destruction . nato officials point out , however , that pcc differs from dci in several important ways: pcc is focused on a smaller number of goals , emphasizes multinational cooperation and specialization , requires specific commitments from member states , and was designed with a particular force in mind: the nato response force ( nrf ) .