interests in the region . for security purposes , the polls were held in four stages , but still were marred by militant violence . press reports estimate at least 700 killings in the state - - including those of 84 political workers and two candidates - - between new delhi's announcement of elections onaugust 2nd and the polling's october 8thconclusion . ( 7 ) in some districts , most notably thosein the kashmir valley , the turnout was quite low - - in the single digits , even - - while in others it was closeto 60% . the average turnout overall was just below 44% . ( 8 ) the ruling national conference party was ousted from power in the 2002 elections , though it did win a plurality of seats in the state assembly ( 28 of a total 87 ) . the indian national congress won 20 seats , and party leader sonia gandhi agreed to a first - ever power - sharingarrangement with the regional people'sdemocratic party ( pdp ) , itself the winner of 16 seats , all of them from the muslim - majority kashmir valley . thealliance of several smaller parties provides aworking majority . pdp leader and veteran politician mufti mohammed sayeed will serve as chief minister forthree years , after which time he is to be replacedby a congress party member as per the coalition agreement . most top ministerial positions have gone to congressmembers . the congress - pdp coalition has agreed to a "common minimum program" ( cmp ) for the governance of jammu and kashmir . several of the cmp policies arehighly controversial in their "softened" approach to militancy in the state . these include launching investigationsinto the deaths of prisoners and the fate ofthousands who have disappeared following their arrest ; the disbanding of the feared special operations group , acounterinsurgency police unit ; the release ofpolitical prisoners ; the opening of a dialogue with militant groups ; and the scrapping of the national prevention ofterrorism act that has been criticized asabusive of human rights . the cmp proposals , while fulfilling an election promise to address kashmiri grievances against separatist militants and indian security forces alike , have comeunder fire from hindu nationalists and top officials in new delhi , many of whom believe that they will onlyencourage militancy and are contrary to india'sinterests . ( 9 ) moreover , the national status of thecongress party requires that it avoid appearing "soft on militancy" and so may add to the obstacles facingsayeed's government . ( 10 ) from the oppositequarter , the commander of a leading militant group , the hizbul mujahideen , called the proposals "cosmetic" andfarshort of what kashmiris seek . ( 11 ) pakistan - basedmilitants threatened sayeed and the pdp with "forceful action" if they entered into a coalition with whatopponents describe as an "indian puppet government. ( 12 ) many ordinary kashmiris , meanwhile , are reported to be pleased with many aspects of the newgovernment's approach . ( 13 ) the decision to release several well - known political prisoners has spurred heightened debate and accusations .