structure and process . nato has a civil and a military structure . the supreme political decision - makingbody , the north atlantic council ( nac ) , sits in brussels , and is chaired by the secretary general . each of the 19member states has a representative on thenac . key proposals for military decisions are made by the military committee ( mc ) . a senior european military officer chairs the military committee . the mchas 18 members because france withdrew from the alliance's integrated military structure in 1966 . france sendsan observer , without a vote , to the mc . france has full representation on the nac , however , as paris did not withdraw from nato's politicaldecision - making structure . the nac has the authorityto approve all key mc documents . normally , any government may have two opportunities to influence a major nato decision . for example , the mc established a working group at the level ofcolonel to work out the deployment and responsibilities of nato member state forces to be sent to bosnia for peaceoperations in the 1990s . the 18representatives on the working group met for eight months , and eventually drafted a document that was approvedby the mc . the mc then sent the documentto the nac's international staff . ultimately , all 19 representatives on the nac refined the document's language,and approved it . reaching consensus is therefore a process in which member governments have ample opportunity to provide language to nato documents and decisions thatreflect national governments' individual views . the north atlantic council ( nac ) . the nac achieves consensus through a process in which nogovernment states its objection . a formal vote in which governments state their position is not taken . during thekosovo conflict , for example , it was clear toall governments that greece was uncomfortable with a decision to go to war . nato does not require a governmentto vote in favor of a conflict , but rather toobject explicitly if it opposes such a decision . athens chose not to object , knowing its allies wished to take militaryaction against serbia . in contrast tonato , the eu seeks unanimity on key issues . unanimity characterizes eu decision - making when , for example,new members are invited to join , or revisionsto the union's governing treaties must be adopted . at nato , the "silence procedure" may be used for any decision requiring a consensus . at times , the procedure allows governments in opposition to a measureto avoid confronting other allies around the table during a session of the nac . the procedure can also providecover for a government from unwanted pressreporting that might characterize its policy as out of step with other allies . by not sending a letter to the secretarygeneral within a specified time period , agovernment can avoid the step of stating its explicit objection to a policy if it believes other allies are set on a courseof action . this procedure failed in theeffort to begin defense planning for turkey when three governments were in opposition .