juries would be so informed . under the third circuit's decision , a jury,presumably , would be cautioned to consider the affirmative - defenseevidence only in reaching a decision on the hostile environment claim , and to ignore or at least downplay the sameevidence in deciding the closely associated constructive dischargeclaim . it makes scant sense thus to alter the decisive instructions from one claim to the next when the only variationbetween the two claims is the severity of the hostile workingconditions . ( 13 ) the court was critical of one other aspect of the third circuit decision . while rejecting the availability of the affirmative defense in any constructive discharge case , the appeals courtsuggested that the existence of an effective anti - harassment policy may nonetheless be relevant to the thresholdquestion of whether the harassment was intolerable and the employee'sdecision to quit a reasonable one . in response , justice ginsburg sought to clarify that the employer , rather theemployee , has the ultimate burden of proving the unreasonableness of theemployee's actions in this regard . in his dissenting opinion , justice thomas faulted the court for adopting an overlybroad definition of constructive discharge , which improperly failedto demand proof by the employee that supervisory harassment was intended to force a resignation . the third circuit erred in drawing the line differently . justice ginsburg elaborated: under its formulation , the affirmative defense would be eliminated in all hostile - environment constructive discharge cases , but retained , as ellerth and faragher require , in 'ordinary' hostile environment cases , i.e. , cases involvingno tangible employment action . that placement of the line , anomalously , would make the graver claim of hostile - environment constructive discharge easier to prove than its lesserincluded component , hostile work environment . moreover , the third circuit's formulation,that court itself recognized , would make matters complex , indeed , more than a little confusing to jurors . creationof a hostile work environment is a necessary predication to a hostileenvironment constructive discharge case . finally , theemployer might be able to demonstrate that , whatever form the underlyingsupervisory harassment may take , it did not meet the standard for constructive discharge: "so intolerable that areasonable person would have felt compelled to resign. but suders alsomakes it more difficult to obtain summary judgment and avoid jury trials in sexual harassment cases involvingconstructive discharge claims . "because of the stringent test for proving constructivedischarge . .it is highly unlikely that the employee will walk off ofthe job at the first sign of harassment and expect to prevail under title vii. ( 12 ) consequently , whenever an employee shows that working conditions havebecome so unendurable as tolead a reasonable employee to resign without formally being dismissed , the employer would be strictly liable forcompensatory and punitive damages or other title vii relief . or , insuders' case , "when an employee has raised a genuine issue of material fact as to a claim of constructive discharge,an employer may not assert , or otherwise rely on , the affirmativedefense in support of its motion for summary judgment.