foreign firms have a direct investment presence in every state . the affiliates of foreign firms spent $248 billion in the united states in 2014 on new plants and equipment , imported $735 billion in goods , and exported $434 billion in goods . since 1980 , the total amount of foreign direct investment in the economy has increased eight - fold and nearly doubled as a share of u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) from 3.4% to 6.4% . it is important to note , however , that these data do not imply anything in particular about the role foreign direct investment has played in the rate of growth of u.s. gdp . the performance of foreign - owned establishments , on average , compared with their u.s. - owned counterparts presents a mixed picture . historically , foreign - owned firms operating in the united states have had lower rates of return , as measured by return on assets , than u.s. - owned firms , although the gap between the two groups appears to have narrowed over time . according to the bureau of economic analysis , this narrowing of the gap in the rate of return appears to be related to age effects , or the costs associated with acquiring or establishing a new business that can entail startup costs that disappear over time and market share . by other measures , foreign - owned manufacturing firms appear to be outperforming their u.s. counterparts . although foreign - owned firms account for less than 3% of all u.s. manufacturing establishments , they have had six times more value added on average and seven times higher value of shipments than other manufacturing establishments . the average plant size for foreign - owned firms is much larger — six times — than for other u.s. firms , on average , in similar industries . this difference in plant size apparently rises from an absence of small plants among those that are foreign - owned . as a result of the larger plant scale and newer plant age , foreign - owned firms paid wages on average that were 60% higher than other u.s. manufacturing firms , had 40% higher productivity per worker , and had 58% greater output per worker than the average of comparable u.s. - owned manufacturing plants . foreign - owned firms also display higher capital intensity in a larger number of industries than all u.s. establishments . these differences between foreign - owned firms and all u.s. firms should be viewed with some caution . first , the two groups of firms are not strictly comparable: the group of foreign - owned firms comprises a subset of all foreign firms , which includes primarily very large firms ; the group of u.s. firms includes all firms , spanning a broader range of sizes . secondly , the differences reflect a range of additional factors , including the prospect that foreign firms that invest in the united states likely are large firms with proven technologies or techniques they have successfully transferred to the united states . small foreign ventures , experimenting with unproven technologies , are unlikely to want the added risk of investing overseas .