eiti . relatedly , afghanistan has signed up as a candidate to the extractive industries transparency initiative ( eiti ) which is intended to ensure that contracting for afghanistan's mineral resources is free of corruption . afghanistan hopes to become fully eiti compliant by april 2012 and the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting in kabul commended afghanistan's progress toward eiti compliance . the world bank gave afghanistan a three - year grant of $52 million to manage its natural resources effectively . salary levels . the government has tried to raise salaries , particularly of security forces , in order to reduce their inclination to solicit bribes . in november 2009 , the afghan government announced an increase in police salaries ( from $180 per month to $240 per month ) . during his term as interior minister , bismillah khan attempted to institute transparency and accountability in promotions and assignments . however , the results of these initiatives remain unclear . bulk cash transfers out of afghanistan . at the july 2010 kabul conference , the government pledged to adopt regulations and implement within one year policies to govern the bulk transfers of cash outside the country . this was intended to grapple with issues raised by reports , discussed below , of officials taking large amounts of cash out of afghanistan ( an estimated $4.5 billion taken out in 2011 ) . u.s. officials say that large movements of cash are inevitable in afghanistan because only about 5% of the population use banks and 90% use informal cash transfers ( "hawala" system ) . the late ambassador holbrooke testified on july 28 , 2010 ( cited earlier ) , that the afghan central bank has tried to control hawala transfers ; 475 hawalas have been licensed , to date , whereas none were licensed as recently as 2009 . in august 2010 , afghan and u.s. authorities began installing u.s. - made currency counters at kabul airport to track how officials had obtained their cash ( and ensure it did not come from donor aid funds ) . on march 19 , 2012 , central bank governor noorullah delawari said the bank had imposed a $20,000 per person limit on cash transfers out of the country . however , a report by the sigar issued december 11 , 2012 , found that the provided currency counters at kabul airport were not being used , nor were procedures to ensure that notable afghan figures were not taking large amounts of cash out of afghanistan being enforced . other reports say that afghans are taking significant amounts of gold out of afghanistan , possibly to hedge against instability . customs revenue diversion . as noted above , some governors of border provinces are siphoning off customs duties that are supposed to be remitted to the central government . in december 2012 , a commission created by karzai investigated the issue in 12 provinces and shut down some of these operations . one scheme shut down was a surtax levied illegitimately at the torkham gate ( khyber pass ) crossing by the provincial government of ghul agha shirzai ( see above on shirzai above ) . auditing capabilities .