the bill ( h.r . 965 ) was reintroduced in the 112 th congress . a differing version of h.r . 1726 was introduced in the 111 th congress . the prevention of farm animal cruelty act ( h.r . 4733 ) , introduced on march 2 , 2010 . the bill was referred to the house agriculture committee's subcommittee on livestock , dairy , and poultry , where no further action was taken . the bill would have prohibited a federal agency from purchasing any food product derived from a "covered animal" — a pregnant pig , a veal calf , or egg - laying hen — unless the animal was raised with adequate space to "stand up , lie down , and turn around freely" and to "fully extend all limbs. ( these phrases are defined more specifically in the bill. ) the measure also would have exempted covered animals from this compliance requirement during lawful transport ; during slaughter , in compliance with the humane methods of slaughter act ; in lawful rodeo , state or county , or other exhibitions ; in lawful scientific or agricultural research ; while undergoing veterinary procedures ; and , in the case of a pregnant pig , during the seven - day period immediately before the expected birth date . 2131 et seq .

 ) , which requires minimum standards of care for certain warm - blooded animals bred for commercial sale , used in research , transported commercially , or exhibited to the public . in 2007 , more than 44,000 horses were shipped for slaughter to mexico and 35,000 to canada , respectively a 312% and 41% increase from 2006 , according to avma . bill supporters argued that one of the intentions of h.r . 6598 was to prevent such exports ; bill critics countered that once horses leave the country , enforcement and oversight would be difficult at best . a separate bill , the horse transportation safety act ( h.r . 6278 ) , would have prohibited the interstate transportation of horses in double - decked trailers . 6278 were reintroduced into the 111 th congress , as h.r . 503 / s. 727 ( the prevention of equine cruelty act of 2009 ) , respectively . the bill was referred to the house subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security where no further action was taken . the horse transportation safety act was also reintroduced in the 111 th congress as h.r . the bill was reported by the committee on transportation on september 28 ( h.rept . 111-645 ) and placed on the union calendar where no further action was taken . members of the house and senate agriculture committees , which generally have jurisdiction over such bills , have held hearings on various farm animal welfare issues , but they have generally expressed a preference for voluntary rather than regulatory approaches to improving animal care . in the 110 th congress , a key provision in the potentially sweeping farm animals anti - cruelty act ( h.r .