these administrative actions are summarized below . on february 15 , 2006 , the dos published the final rules on the accreditation and approval of agencies and persons concerned with the international adoption process in accordance with the convention . the first body of regulations concerns the approval and accreditation of adoption service providers who wish to provide services in adoption cases subject to the convention ( part 96 ) . the regulations set out the procedures and the standards that will be used in the approval and the accreditation process . the second body of regulations concerns the federal government's preservation of convention records ( parts 97 , 98 ) . on its website , the dos summarized the extensive preparations that were necessary to be completed prior to convention implementation and formal ratification . these included the following: 1 ) establish and staff the central authority within the office of children's issues , bureau of consular affairs ; 2 ) promulgate regulations to ( a ) establish requirements / procedures for the designation and monitoring of accrediting entities , ( b ) set the standards that must be met for non - profit adoption agencies to qualify for convention accreditation and for other agencies and individuals to qualify for convention approval , ( c ) govern the registration of smaller community - based agencies for temporary accreditation , and ( d ) provide the procedures and requirements for incoming and outgoing convention adoptions involving the united states ; 3 ) establish a case - tracking computer system for intercountry adoptions ; 4 ) designate entities to accredit non - profit u.s. adoption agencies to provide adoption services for convention adoptions and the related approval of adoption providers ; 5 ) prepare designated accrediting entities to ( a ) process applications for convention accreditation and approvals and registration for temporary accreditation , ( b ) deal with complaints , and ( c ) continuously monitor the compliance by accredited agencies and approved persons with the requirements of the convention , the iaa , and the regulations ; 6 ) oversee preparations by accrediting entities and the usca of the first list of providers authorized under the convention to offer and provide adoption services for convention adoptions ; 7 ) establish education materials and programs about convention adoptions ; and 8 ) deposit the u.s. instrument of ratification and entry into force of the convention between the united states and other party countries . the dos completed these preparations in late 2007 . on december 12 , 2007 , assistant secretary of state for consular affairs maura harty deposited the united states' instrument of ratification of the convention at a ceremony in the hague . as a result of this action , the united states is now a full member of the hague adoption convention , which entered into force for the united states on april 1 , 2008 . the dos has various ongoing responsibilities with respect to the convention and intercountry adoption . annual reports to congress are required by the iaa concerning certain aspects of the convention and the iaa implementation .