4340 ) on november 16 . formal approval of the implementing legislation was given in separate votes by the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee on november 18 . the implementing legislation was passed by the house on december 7 and passed by the senate and cleared for the white house on december 13 . the agreement was signed into law by the president on january 11 , 2006 , as the united states - bahrain free trade agreement implementation act ( p.l . the agreement entered into force on august 1 , 2006 , following the passage of legislation in bahrain providing increased intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection . according to the bahrain - based gulf daily news , six new ipr laws were passed by both houses of bahrain's parliament . the agreement entered into force following approval of the new laws by king hamad bin isa al khalifa . in the united states , the afl / cio provided the only significant opposition to the agreement . some house democrats expressed labor concerns during the november 3 rd vote but eventually supported the agreement after receiving assurances from the bahraini government that they would make progress on new legislation offering additional labor protections . the fta is supported by the national association of manufacturers , the bankers' association for finance and trade , the motion picture association of america , and phrma , the association of pharmaceutical manufacturers , among other groups . there has been some dissent in the middle east region over the u.s. - bahrain fta . saudi arabia , a member of the gulf co - operation council ( gcc ) , has alleged that gcc countries that sign bilateral trade agreements with the united states violate a gcc economic agreement that members cannot grant greater trade preferences to non - gcc countries . according to press reports , saudi arabia has threatened imposing a 5% duty on any u.s. goods that are imported into the gcc and then exported to saudi arabia . according to one source , saudi arabia may be concerned that u.s. agricultural products , especially wheat , may be exported to saudi arabia via other gcc countries such as bahrain . bahrain officials have argued that saudi arabia has not contested other bilateral ftas that bahrain has signed , and alleges that saudi arabia's complaints are political , not economic , in nature . domestically , some analysts have raised concern that the u.s. government strategy of completing ftas with countries such as bahrain , whose u.s. trade is relatively small , is not necessarily the best use of ustr's resources . others argue that the ustr should be investing more resources into potentially more economically significant agreements such as the proposed free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) . the administration contends that its fta agreements are effective as building blocks to future agreements and increased political and economic reform . many attribute bahrain's selection as the first u.s. free trade agreement in the persian gulf to ( 1 ) the strong u.s. - bahrain political military relationship , and ( 2 ) political and economic reform in bahrain .