an enacted continuing resolution ( p.l . 110-329 ) will provide funding for u.s. aid programs at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 . the united states is ecuador's main trading partner , with some 45% of ecuadorian exports going to the united states . machinery and plastics are the leading u.s. exports to ecuador , while oil , bananas , and shrimp account for the bulk of u.s. imports from ecuador . these efforts spawned sustained popular protests . although the economy grew some 6.3% in 2004 as a result of high oil prices , remittance flows , and a weak u.s. dollar , a lack of fiscal discipline postponed the renewal of a new imf stand - by agreement . for the last several years , investors have been concerned by the ecuadorian government's lack of fiscal discipline during a time of strong oil revenue growth . the ecuadorian economy could face serious budget shortfalls in the short to medium term should global oil prices continue to fall . on january 15 , 2007 , rafael correa , a left - leaning , u.s. - trained economist , began a four - year term as president of ecuador . correa , an economics professor whose only prior government experience was a four - month stint as alfredo palacio's finance minister , surprised many analysts by finishing second in the first round of presidential voting held in october 2006 . contrary to many analysts' predictions , correa won the november 2006 run - off election with 57% of the vote against alvaro noboa , a well - known banana magnate , who earned 43% of the vote . voters appeared to embrace correa's pledge to enact dramatic political reform . nearly halfway through his term , president correa continues to enjoy high approval ratings . those ratings have been boosted by his efforts to reform the country's political system , increase social spending , and reassert government control over ecuador's economy and territory . many ecuadorians approved correa's condemnation of colombia's unauthorized march 2008 raid of a guerrilla camp in ecuador . they also supported his decision not to renew the u.s. lease on the air force base at manta when it expires in 2009 , a decision which has strained u.s. - ecuadorian relations . correa's economic policies , though popular among ecuadorians , have concerned foreign investors . foreign direct investment in ecuador fell from some $271 million in 2006 to roughly $179 million in 2007 . president correa has recently suggested that , given declining oil revenues , his government may default on part of its roughly $10 billion foreign debt . ecuador's relations with the united states have traditionally been close , although recent events have strained bilateral relations . while the united states has concluded free trade agreements ( ftas ) with peru and colombia , negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement with ecuador have been suspended indefinitely in the wake of the dispute with the u.s. firm occidental petroleum . u.s. officials have expressed concerns about correa's populist tendencies , his ties with hugo chávez of venezuela , and his state - centered economic policies .