congress chose not to do so , however . even if the report language were to be given greater weight , however , the language itself does not evince an intent completely to constrain the treasury secretary's authority . this is not to suggest that committee reports are not important interpretive tools . on the contrary , these reports are among courts' favorite sources of interpretation . later cases have clarified the scope of chevron . for example , the chevron deference is available only to interpretations of an agency to which congress has delegated the authority to make "rules carrying the force of law. generally , then , chevron deference is warranted for agency interpretations after formal adjudication or notice - and - comment rulemaking . actions pursuant to less formal interpretations are "entitled to respect" under an earlier case , skidmore v. swift co. because it is not clear how , or even if , the treasury department will issue an interpretation , this report analyzes the strength of the treasury department's reported proposed interpretation under both chevron and skidmore . chevron analysis requires a two - step inquiry . first , the court must ask if the statute is ambiguous . if not , then the court simply rules according to the clear meaning of the statute . however , if the statute is ambiguous , the court must determine whether the agency's interpretation is reasonable . if the interpretation is reasonable , the court must then defer to that interpretation . here , it would seem that the analysis would end after the first prong . the statute is not ambiguous ; it vests approval authority in the secretary of the treasury . the language in both statutes clearly gives the treasury secretary approval authority over fannie's and freddie's debt issuances . there appears to be nothing in the statutory language to suggest that this approval authority is limited to the "traffic cop" role through which the secretary has traditionally exercised this power . the statutory language in both fannie mae's and freddie mac's charters conditions the issuance of debt obligations upon the approval of the secretary of the treasury . the power to approve seems clearly to imply the concomitant power to disapprove . indeed , the power to approve would be no power at all if an agency did not have the ability to withhold that approval . there is one notable supreme court case where the court , faced with clear statutory language , used superceding congressional and agency action to find ambiguity under the first chevron prong . in fda v. brown & williamson tobacco corp. , the fda had interpreted its statutory mandate to regulate "drugs" and "devices" to give the agency the power to regulate tobacco . the supreme court , however , looked at the fda's long history of disclaiming authority over tobacco and the fact that congress had legislatively addressed tobacco regulation separately six times to find a congressional intent contrary to the agency's proposed interpretation . there appears to be no such history here which would force a reviewing court to look beyond the language of the statute . congress has passed no legislation evincing a different congressional intent from what the language indicates .