supreme court . insurers are concerned that the case could lead to a determination of a new discriminationstandard over and above the state lawprohibiting unfair discrimination , and thus usurp the authority of state insurance regulators and state laws . ( 19 ) allstate is not the only insurer who has been to court on such an issue . in illinois , a suit alleged that state farm had engaged in the practice of refusing to issueor renew insurance policies solely on the basis of a credit report , in violation of the illinois insurance code . ( 20 ) in texas , the attorney general sued farmersinsurance group , alleging , among other charges , that the insurer was "using credit history as a significant factor insetting premiums , without disclosing theadverse impact of doing so...." ( 21 ) a settlementwas reached in the texas case in december 2002 , but it was challenged by some texas policyholders . congressmangutierrez previously introduced h.r . 1473 to specifically regulate insurers' use of credit information and he offered an amendment at thesubcommittee markup of h.r . 2622 calling for a study of insurer usage of credit information . this amendment was accepted andincluded in the bill as reported from the fullcommittee . the senate held hearings and passed a bill amending the fcra , s. 1753 , after the house . thisbill also included the requirement for aslightly different study on the usage of credit information in insurance . the conference committee made furtherslight changes to the study requirement and itwas included in the conference report as passed and signed by the president ( p.l . unlike banks and other financial institutions that are regulated primarily at the federal level , insurers are regulated primarily at the state level . ( 10 ) most stateinsurance laws prohibit unfair trade practices , and also require that insurance rates not be unfairly discriminatory . many states require prior approval ofinsurance premium rates , especially those for personal lines such as automobile and homeowners insurance . statelawmakers are beginning to turn theirattention to the issue of insurers' using credit - based insurance scores in making underwriting , marketing , and ratingdecisions . according to the nationalassociation of mutual insurance companies ( namic ) , 48 states have taken legislative or regulatory actionaddressing insurer use of credit historyinformation . ( 11 ) many of the state laws arefollowing a model law ( 12 ) recommended by thenational conference of insurance legislators ( ncoil ) and generallysupported by insurers . the law was described in congressional testimony ( 13 ) as requiring "insurers: to notify an applicant for insurance if credit information will be used in underwriting and rating ; to notify a consumer in the event of an adverse action based on credit information , includingnotification of factors that were the primaryinfluences on the adverse action ; to re - underwrite and re - rate a policyholder whose credit report was corrected ; to indemnify insurance agents / brokers who obtained credit information and / or insurance scoresaccording to an insurer's procedures andaccording to applicable laws and regulations ; to file its scoring models with the applicable state department of insurance ; such filings are deemedtrade secrets.