a number of madrasa students were detained in connection with the investigations . executive agencies and congress have shown increasing interest in improving u.s. outreach and addressing educational challenges in the muslim world in the aftermath of the september 11 terrorist attacks . the final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the "9 / 11 commission" ) addressed education issues in the islamic world in the context of its recommendations to identify and prioritize actual or possible terrorist sanctuaries and prevent the continued growth of islamist terrorism . relevant sections of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l . 108 - 458 , december 17 , 2004 ) address many of the concerns reflected in the 9 / 11 commission's final report regarding the improvement of educational opportunity in the islamic world . section 7114 of the act authorizes the president to establish an international youth opportunity fund to improve public education in the middle east . over 100 people were reportedly killed in related clashes . the administration requested $259.664 million in fy2008 foreign operations funding to support ongoing education assistance programs in a number of middle eastern countries , including egypt , yemen , jordan , iraq , lebanon , and morocco . the administration requested $118.670 million for similar programs in south and central asia , including programs in afghanistan , pakistan , and bangladesh . in the 110 th congress , title xx of p.l . 110 - 53 , the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( signed august 3 , 2007 ) , amends and re - authorizes appropriations for an international muslim youth opportunity fund originally authorized by section 7114 of p.l . the law also requires the administration to submit an annual report to congress on the efforts of arab and predominantly muslim countries to increase the availability of modern basic education and to close educational institutions that promote religious extremism and terrorism . a separate report is required on u.s. education assistance and the status of efforts to create the authorized fund . in september 2007 , the u.s. department of state reported in its annual religious freedom report that "in recent years many [pakistani] madrasas have taught extremist doctrine in support of terrorism. the report identified "unregistered and deobandi - controlled madrasas in the federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) and northern balochistan" and "dawa schools run by jamat - ud - dawa" as being involved with teaching extremism or supporting terrorist organizations . currently , the popularity of madrasas is rising in parts of southeast asia . for example in indonesia , home to the largest number of muslims in the world , almost 20% - 25% of primary and secondary school children attend pesantren s ( islamic religious schools ) . indonesian pesantrens have been noted for teaching a moderate form of islam , one that encompasses islamic mysticism or sufism . authorities in bangladesh have expressed concern about the use of madrasas by a network of islamist activists being investigated in connection with a number of attempted and successful bombing attacks across the country .