"priority. he offered u.s. support to kosovo in dealing with its many challenges , including building effective institutions , fighting organized crime and corruption , and improving ties with ethnic minorities . he said he stressed to serbian leaders the united states' own strong support for an independent kosovo and urged them to cooperate with kosovo institutions and eulex instead of setting up separate institutions for kosovo serbs . on the other hand , when he was in belgrade , biden told serbia's leaders that he did not expect them to recognize kosovo's independence in order to have improved relations with the united states . although strongly supporting the serbia - kosovo talks , u.s. officials have said the united states is a "guest," not a participant or mediator . however , the u.s. role is still significant , given that kosovar leaders view the united states as their country's most powerful and reliable ally . on september 10 , 2012 , the white house issued a statement by president obama hailing the end of supervised independence in kosovo . he said kosovo has made "significant progress" in "building the institutions of a modern , multi - ethnic , inclusive and democratic state. he added kosovo had more work to do in ensuring that the rights enshrined in the country's constitution are realized for every citizen . president obama also called on kosovo to continue to work to resolve outstanding issues with its neighbors , especially serbia . u.s. officials have also urged serbia to come to terms with kosovo's independence , including by normalizing ties with pristina and dismantling parallel serbian institutions in kosovo . secretary of state hillary clinton visited the region in late october and early november 2012 , stopping in bosnia , serbia , kosovo , croatia , and albania . in a move that underlines the u.s. focus on coordination with the eu , she visited bosnia , serbia , and kosovo jointly with eu foreign policy chief baroness catherine ashton . at every stop , clinton emphasized the solidarity between brussels and washington on balkan policy . during visits to serbia and kosovo , clinton stressed the importance for both sides to negotiate in good faith in the eu - brokered talks aimed at normalizing their relationship so that they can integrate with the european union . she praised kosovo prime minister hashim thaci for meeting in brussels with serbian prime minister ivica dacic and ashton . clinton stressed that the united states regards kosovo's sovereignty and territorial integrity as completely non - negotiable . although most eu countries would agree with the statement , ashton could not make such a comment , as the eu is divided on the issue of kosovo's independence . clinton's statement may have been aimed at offering reassurance to thaci for the talks , which are about as controversial in kosovo as they are in serbia . it is considered likely that kosovo will face pressure from serbia and possibly from some eu countries to agree to wide - ranging de facto autonomy for serbian - dominated northern kosovo .