, the use of force in anticipation of an attack . hugo grotius , the father of international law,stated in theseventeenth century that "[i]t be lawful to kill him who is preparing to kill. as a consequence , it seems doubtful that the use of force against iraq couldbedeemed to meet the traditional legal tests justifying preemptive attack . but iraq may have possessed wmd , andit mayhave had ties to terrorist groups that seek to use such weapons against the u.s . no act can be so described which is not occasioned by attack or fear ofattack . when acts of self - preservation on the part of a state are strictly acts of self - defense , they are permitted by the lawofnations , and are justified on principle , even though they may conflict with the ... rights of otherstates . that would seem to be permissible only if article 51 is read notliterally but as preserving the use of force in self - defense as traditionally allowed in customary international law . as noted,the construction of article 51 remains a matter of debate . but so construed , article 51 would not preclude thepreemptiveuse of force by the u.s. against iraq or other sovereign nations . to be lawful , however , such uses of force wouldneed tomeet the traditional requirements of necessity and proportionality . as the examples listed above illustrate , the requirement of necessity is most easily met when an armed attack is clearlyimminent , as in the case of the arab - israeli war of 1967 . but beyond such obvious situations , as abram chayesargued,the judgment of necessity becomes increasingly subjective ; and there is at present no consensus either in theory orpracticeabout whether the possession or development of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) by a rogue state justifies thepreemptive use of force . most analysts recognize that if overwhelmingly lethal weaponry is possessed by a nationwillingto use that weaponry directly or through surrogates ( such as terrorists ) , some kind of anticipatory self - defense maybe amatter of national survival ; and many - including the bush administration - contend that international law oughtto allow,if it does not already do so , for the preemptive use of force in that situation . ( 19 ) but many states and analysts are decidedlyreluctant to legitimate the preemptive use of force against threats that are only potential and not actual on thegrounds thejustification can easily be abused . moreover , it remains a fact that the international community judged israel'sdestructionof iraq's nuclear reactor site in 1981 to be an aggressive act rather than an act of self - defense . iraq has become an occasion to revisit the issue . iraq had not attacked the u.s. , nor did it appear to pose an imminent threatof attack in traditional military terms . if evidence is forthcoming on bothof thoseissues , then the situation necessarily raises the question that the bush administration articulated in its nationalsecuritystrategy , i.e . , whether the traditional law of preemption ought to be recast in light of the realities ofwmd , rogue states , andterrorism . iraq likely will not resolve that question , but it is an occasion to crystallize the debate .