they cannot reproduce by themselves . to multiply , a virus must hijack the replicationmachinery in living cells by infecting another organism . smallpox is caused by the variola virus , which undernormal circumstances only infects human cells . there are two types of variola viruses . variola minor causes a relatively mild disease that has less thana 1% fatality rate . variola major causes what isgenerally thought of as smallpox , a very severe illness with a fatality rate of approximately 30% . ( 1 ) these viruses are part of the orthopox genus whichalsocontains the viruses responsible for vaccinia , monkeypox , cowpox , camelpox and mousepox . before the last reported case of smallpox ( a result of a laboratory accident in england in 1978 ) , smallpox was considered to be one of the worst scourges inhuman history . smallpox is estimated to have killed between 300 and 500 million people in the twentieth centuryalone . once infected , the victim incubates the virus for seven to seventeen days during which the victim feels and appears normal . this stage is followed by one tofour days of high fever , malaise , headache , and muscle ache , often accompanied with nausea and vomiting . duringthis time the person looks and feels very ill,but is not yet contagious . after this stage , the characteristic sores develop ; first in the mouth then over the rest ofthe body . if the victim survives , the soresscab over and turn to scars in three to four weeks . about 30% of unvaccinated victims die ( some sources suggestup to 50% ) . up to 80% of the survivors aredisfigured by pockmarks or limb deformities . smallpox is contagious , but the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) ( 3 ) considers it to spread less widely and less rapidly than chickenpox,measles , whooping cough , or influenza . the victim is most likely to infect other people when the sores in the mouthare most active . this is in the first weekof the rash when virus comes out of the sores and into the saliva where they are easily aerosolized by coughing orsneezing . although smallpox is usuallytransmitted by face to face contact , it can also be transmitted through the air over dozens of feet and by contaminatedclothing or bedding . the vaccine works by infecting a person with vaccinia virus which is closely related to smallpox virus . ( 4 ) the vaccine triggers immunity against all closelyrelated viruses , including smallpox . this immunity decreases over time ; however , people who contract smallpoxeven thirty years after vaccination are muchless likely to die than unvaccinated people . ( 5 ) interestingly , the vaccine also helps reduce the severity of the disease if given to victims within a few days aftersmallpox exposure . this is the only known treatment for smallpox , although several antiviral drugs have shownpromise in preliminary laboratory studies . although the vaccinia vaccine is very effective at preventing smallpox , it is not without risks . its complication rate is higher than that associated with anyroutinely used vaccine .