what does this mean for plans currently in medicare ? all areas of the country will be part of a region in the regional program , including areas currently served by local maplans . it is unclear whether the incentives to participate in the regional program will be ( 1 ) enough to encourageplans to participate , or ( 2 ) so great that regional plans can offermore generous benefits than local ma plans and attract beneficiaries away from the local plans within the region . moreover , some plans may choose to participate in theregional program in addition to , or instead of participating as local ma plans . how local ma plans react to theregional program will be based on business decisions about risk,profit and competition . the secretary is to establish a six - year comparative cost adjustment ( cca ) program beginning on january 1 , 2010 , and ending on december 31 , 2015 . the cca program isdesigned to enhance competition between local private plans in the medicare program and to compare the overallefficiency of these plans with respect to traditional medicare . ma plans in cca area can only be local plans , as regional plans can not participate in the program . an area canqualify for the program if it is a metropolitan statistical area ( msa ) with at least two ma organizations and has at least 25% of medicare beneficiaries enrolled in ma localplans . of those msas that qualify , no more than 6 areas , or25% of the areas that meet the requirements will participate . there are two major differences between comparative cost adjustment areas and non - cca areas . first , in a cca area , payments to local ma plans will be based oncompetitive bids , similar to payments for the regional ma plans . the benchmark that is compared to each plan'sbid is not strictly an increase over the previous year'sbenchmark ( as in non - cca areas ) , but rather a weighted average of plan bids and the cost of traditional ffsmedicare in an area . ( there is a five - year phase - in of ccabenchmarks. ) second , in a cca area , traditional medicare will compete with local ma plans . while ffsbeneficiaries in non - cca areas will continue to pay the standardmedicare part b premium , beneficiaries in cca areas could have their part b premium either increased ordecreased . ffs beneficiaries in cca areas would pay higher part bpremiums if the cost of providing the standard medicare benefit package was more expensive in ffs than the costin the local ma plans . conversely , ffs beneficiaries in acca area would paid lower part b premiums if the ffs costs are less expensive the ma costs . the premium isphased - in over five years , and additionally , cannot exceed105% of what it would have been for beneficiaries in the cca area . proponents of the cca program anticipate that competition in cca areas would decrease costs to the medicare program , perhaps through such strategies as steepernegotiations with providers or more attention to disease management .