historical overview . the historical record indicates that the united states has never , to date , engaged in apreemptive military attack , as traditionally defined , against another nation . and only once has the united statesever unilaterally attacked another nationmilitarily prior to its first having been attacked or prior to u.s. citizens or interests firsthaving been attacked . that instance was the spanish - american war of1898 . in that military conflict , the principal goal of united states military action was to compel spain to grant cubaits political independence . an act ofcongress , passed in april 1898 , just prior to the u.s. declaration of war against spain , explicitly declared cuba tobe independent of spain , demanded thatspain withdraw its military forces from the island , and authorized the president to use u.s. military force to achievethese ends , if necessary . ( 3 ) spain rejectedthese demands , and an exchange of declarations of war by both countries soon followed thereafter . ( 4 ) although u.s. military actions against spain werebasedon special u.s. foreign policy considerations , they occurred after war was formally declared , and cannot be fairlycharacterized as preemptive in nature . during the cuban missile crisis of 1962 , preemptive use of military force to destroy soviet missiles that had beenintroduced into cuba was very seriously consideredin the early days of the crisis , but the matter was ultimately resolved diplomatically . although the united statesdid not use military force "preemptively," it diddeploy military forces as an adjunct to its diplomacy , while reserving its right to take additional military actions asit deemed appropriate . the circumstances surrounding the origins of the mexican war are somewhat controversial in nature - but the term preemptive attack by the united states doesnot apply to this conflict . during , and immediately following the first world war , the united states , as part ofallied military operations , sent military forcesinto parts of russia to protect its interests , and to render limited aid to anti - bolshevik forces during the russian civilwar . in major military actions since thesecond world war , the president has either obtained congressional authorization for use of military force againstother nations , in advance of using it , or hasdirected military actions abroad on his own initiative in support of multinational operations such as those of theunited nations or of mutual securityarrangements like the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) . examples of these actions include participationin the korean war , the 1990-1991 persiangulf war , and the bosnian and kosovo operations in the 1990s . the use of military force against iraq in 2003,while controversial within the internationalcommunity , was justified by the united states , the united kingdom and others , as an action necessary to enforceexisting u.n. security council resolutions thatmandated iraqi disarmament . yet in all of these varied instances of the use of military force by the united states,such military action was a "response," afterthe fact , and was not preemptive in nature , as traditionally defined . central american and caribbean interventions . this is not to say that the united states has not used its militaryto intervene in other nations in support of its foreign policy interests .