each of these authorities is discussed below . when an executive branch advice and consent position covered by the vacancies act becomes vacant , it may be filled temporarily in one of three ways under the act: ( 1 ) the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office ; ( 2 ) the president may direct an officer who is occupying a different advice and consent position to perform these tasks ; or ( 3 ) the president may select an officer or employee who is occupying a position , in the same agency , for which the rate of pay is equal to or greater than the minimum rate of pay at the gs - 15 level , and who has served in that agency for at least 90 days during the year preceding the vacancy . in general , a temporary appointment under the vacancies act continues until no later than 210 days after the date the vacancy occurred or , if the vacancy occurred during a senate recess , 210 days after the date the senate reconvenes . the time restriction is suspended , and the acting officer can continue to serve , if a first or second nomination for the position has been submitted to the senate for confirmation and is pending . the acting officer can continue to serve for an additional 210 days after the rejection , withdrawal , or return of such a nomination . notably , the supreme court of the united states has held that a provision of the vacancies act limits the conditions under which an individual may serve in both an acting capacity and as the nominee to the same position . the court's opinion appears to allow an individual to serve on this basis only if the individual has served as the first assistant to the vacant position for more than 90 of the preceding 365 days or if the individual is serving as first assistant , and that position itself requires the advice and consent of the senate . temporary appointments to vacancies that exist during the 60-day period following the inauguration of a new president are treated differently , which gives the new president additional flexibility during the transition . the ordinary 210-day restriction period does not commence until the later of the following two dates: 90 days after the incoming president assumes office , or 90 days after the vacancy occurs . in the event that such a nomination is not successful , two provisions of law might subsequently prevent the individual from being paid as an acting official . unlike the provisions of 5 u.s.c . ยง5503 , which pertain to recess appointments alone and are discussed above , the following provisions appear to apply to any situation in which an individual is filling an advice and consent position on a temporary basis . one provision from the fy2008 financial services and general government appropriations act may prevent the official from being paid if the nomination is rejected .