, tradeable permits ) . a model for a tradeable permit approach is the sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) allowance program contained in title iv of the 1990 clean air act amendments . also called the acid rain control program , the tradeable permit system is based on two premises . first , a set amount of so 2 emitted by human activities can be assimilated by the ecological system without undue harm . thus the goal of the program is to put a ceiling , or cap , on the total emissions of so 2 rather than limit ambient concentrations . thus , the offender pays a fine three times the estimated cost of control in addition to forfeiting a future permit . the possibility of failure to comply with a binding commitment intensifies one's perspective on potential costs: how confident can one be in the claim that carbon reductions can be achieved at little or no cost ? compliance cost estimates ranging from $5.5 billion to $200 billion annually cause some to pause . the current bush administration was sufficiently concerned about potential co 2 control costs to reverse a campaign pledge to seek co 2 emissions reductions from power plants , in addition to its decision to abandon the kyoto protocol process . proposed co 2 reduction schemes present large uncertainties in terms of the perceived reduction needs and the potential costs of achieving those reductions . in an attempt to prevent any co 2 control program from incurring unacceptable costs , several cost - limiting "safety valves" have been proposed to bound costs . these safety valves are designed to work with market - based co 2 reduction schemes , similar to the tradeable permit strategy used by the acid rain program , and would effectively limit the unit ( per ton of emissions ) control costs sources would pay . this report examines four such safety valves: ( 1 ) a straight carbon tax , ( 2 ) a contingent reduction scheme , ( 3 ) unlimited permit purchases , ( 4 ) cost - based excess emissions penalties . in general , market - based mechanisms to reduce co 2 emissions focus on specifying either the acceptable emissions level ( quantity ) , or compliance costs ( price ) , and allowing the marketplace to determine the economically efficient solution for the other variable . for example , a tradeable permit program sets the amount of emissions allowable under the program ( i.e. , the number of permits available caps allowable emissions ) , while permitting the marketplace to determine what each permit will be worth . likewise , a carbon tax sets the maximum unit ( per ton of co 2 ) cost that one should pay for reducing emissions , while the marketplace determines how much actually gets reduced . in one sense , preference for a carbon tax or a tradeable permit system depends on how one views the uncertainty of costs involved and benefits to be received .