registration no . 571,798 ( "roquefort" ) for that french cheese . other means also would beavailable to protectgeographical indications ( see footnote 5 for details ) . the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) provides protection for some specific geographical indications by recognizingthat bourbon whiskey , tennessee whiskey , canadian whiskey , tequila , and mezcal are "distinctive products" inthe nafta countries where they are produced ( nafta , chapter 3 , annex 313 ) . the so - called d'amato amendment ( section910 of p.l.105-32 ) provides authority for the use of "semi - generic" names of wines if the true place of origin also isindicated . ( 8 ) ( this use is amain point of contention in both multilateral and bilateral negotiations with the eu. ) two issues concerning geographical indications are under consideration in the doha development agenda: negotiations concerning amultilateral registry for wine and spirits ; and debate over extending additional protections for agriculturalgeographical indications . ( 1 ) negotiating a multilateral registry for wine and spirits the ministerial declaration launching the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations established the fifth wto ministerialconference ( september 10-14 , 2003 in cancun , mexico ) as the deadline for completing negotiations for amultilateral system ofnotification and registration . ( 9 ) in the negotiations , the eu has proposed a multilateral system of notification and registration that would create obligations for wtomember countries to grant exclusive rights for individual geographic indications , rather than allow interested partiesto apply forprotection according to a country's national legal procedures . ( 10 ) participation would be voluntary , but the multilateral registry wouldhave mandatory effect , so that notification of a geographical indication by one country creates a presumption thatit must be protectedeverywhere . under the eu proposal , a country would be required to grant exclusive rights to producers in thenotifying country,unless it successfully challenged the notification in wto dispute settlement . the eu lists among the advantages of a registry with mandatory effect the following . it would provide information to members aboutwhich geographical indications are protected in each member's territory . it would make operational the protectionsextended togeographical indications for wines and spirits provided in trips article 23 , without requiring members to enactnew legislation oradministrative procedures . it would provide transparency and legal certainty to international trade in wine andspirits . the united states , japan , chile , canada , new zealand , australia and others have all expressed concern about a registry withmandatory effect on grounds that it would lead to new and costly administrative burdens and legal obligations . theysee the proposedmultilateral registry as a clearing house for information about the protection of specific geographical indications ineach country . applications for protection of geographical indications would be made through existing legal procedures in a wtomember country . while multilateral negotiations have been underway , the united states and the eu have been negotiating a bilateral wine agreement . a principal eu objective is to secure an end to u.s. use of "semi - generic" names for wines ( see footnote 5 ) . theeu is also seekingprotection for what it calls traditional terms applied to wines such as "tawny" or "ruby red" , among others .