the government of morocco today is a constitutional monarchy . the most senior committee , the advisory committee for trade policy and negotiations , found the agreement "to be strongly in the u.s. interest and to be an incentive for additional bilateral and regional agreements. advisory committees on services , goods , and intellectual property also expressed broad support . however , the labor advisory committee expressed concerns that were echoed by several ways and means committee democrats at the july 7 , 2004 hearing . these concerns were basically whether the trade agreement goes far enough in encouraging morocco to meet basic international labor standards . yet morocco's over 20 political parties create a fragmented political system , making it difficult for the government to reach consensus on how best to address its many social and economic problems . critically , high unemployment that averages over 20% in urban areas , increasing income inequality , and widespread poverty provide fertile ground for increasing support for a fundamentalist islamist movement , al - adl wal - ihsane ( justice and charity ) . with a per capita income of about $2,000 ( 2002 ) , morocco also faces challenges typical of many poor developing countries . these include preparing the economy for freer trade , reducing public sector wage rates and bloated ministries , increasing labor market flexibility and skills , restoring a crumbling infrastructure , and reducing dependence on imported energy . morocco's economy is based on mining , agriculture , fishing , tourism , a growing manufacturing sector , and a deregulated telecommunications sector . morocco has the world's largest phosphate reserves , and exports of phosphates from state - owned companies account for about 17% of morocco's total exports . agriculture accounts for between 15-20% of gdp and employs between 40-45% of its workforce ( services employs around 35% and industry around 15% ) . morocco is a net exporter of fruits and vegetables and a net importer of cereals , oilseeds , and sugar . severe droughts often hurt morocco's farm production , thereby serving as a drag on economic growth . the moroccan economy also depends heavily on the inflow of funds from moroccans working abroad . the illegal production and export of cannabis also plays a role in the economy , particularly in the north . the european union is its primary trading partner , accounting for nearly 67% of its exports and 55% of its imports in 2002 . france is morocco's single largest trading partner by a wide margin . the united states is a relatively small trading partner , accounting for about 5% of morocco's total trade . the bush administration's decision to negotiate a fta with morocco was a surprise to a number of observers . a u.s. chamber of commerce official , for example , questioned the decision on the grounds that the united states does not do a lot of business with morocco and that other middle eastern countries , such as egypt and turkey , would be more suitable partners . the bush administration , backed by a coalition of u.s. companies that support the negotiation , responded that both u.s. economic and political interests ( see below ) will be well served by the proposed fta .