russia . strategic ( long - range ) nuclear weapons are reportedly well guarded on missiles or , thanks in part to u.s. assistance , in storage . in contrast , thousands of shorter - rangelower - yield weapons intended for use in combat are less well secured , and numbers and locations are uncertain . this forensic capability strengthens the value of controlling russian nuclearweapons and materials: finding that material for a bomb detonated in the united states came from russia , a likelysource , would in all probability lead to the conclusion that the material was stolen rather than that russia conductedthe attack . at the same time , augmenting already - excellent forensic capability through technology and intelligencecould help deter other nations from giving nuclear materials to terrorists . ports in major cities . the terrorist weapons discussed earlier , while lower in yield than strategic weapons , might produce blast damage over a radius of 1 to 2 miles , and fire andfallout beyond that range . accordingly , it might be argued that ports with the greatest number of people living orworking within a mile or two of cargo docks , such as philadelphia and new york , should have highest priority inreceiving security resources . ameliorating economic consequences . cold war civil defense studies examined how to ameliorate the destructive effects of a large nuclear attack . this effort , and more recentemergency preparedness efforts , provide a template for response and recovery following a terrorist attack using one15-kiloton weapon . this work does not , however , address possible global economic consequences and how topredictand mitigate them . these issues could benefit from further study and analyses . what priority should port security have ? the 9 / 11 commission wrote , "opportunities to do harm are as great , or greater , in maritime or surface transportation [compared tocommercial aviation] . initiatives to secure shipping containers have just begun. terrorists "may be deterred byasignificant chance of failure. ( 20 ) improving theability to detect terrorist nuclear weapons in the maritimetransportation system may make a terrorist attack on a port less likely to succeed , and thus less probable . theamerican association of port authorities , a trade association , welcomed federal grants for port security upgradestocomply with the mtsa , but called for "substantially greater resources. ( 21 ) others agree that more resources areneeded to secure u.s. ports , such as to reduce overcrowding of cargo - handling facilities and to hire more workers . ( 22 ) a similar case could be made for gas pipelines , electric power plants , rail yards , or bridges . at issue for congressishow to allocate security funds among ports and other potential targets . ( back ) abt associates , "the economic impactof nuclear terrorist attacks on freight transport systems in an age ofseaport vulnerability," executive summary , april 30 , 2003 , p. 7 , http: / / www.abtassociates.com / reports / es - economic_impact_of_nuclear_terrorist_attacks.pdf . ( back ) u.s. department of homeland security,bureau of customs and border protection , "remarks by commissionerrobert c. bonner , council on foreign relations , new york , new york," january 11 , 2005 .