there is no standard wui definition . however , the definition listed in a 2001 federal register notice is commonly referenced — the urban - wildland interface community exists where humans and their development meet or intermix with wildland fuel . in this same notice , the usfs and doi identified three types of wui communities: interface , intermix , and occluded . based on state data , they listed nearly 4,500 interface communities ( with 11 states not providing data ) . the agencies defined an interface community as one where wildlands abut structures with a clear line of demarcation between residential , business , and public structures and wildland fuels , while an intermix community is where structures are scattered and intermingled with wildlands and fuels . an occluded community , generally existing within a city , is where structures abut an island of wildland fuels ( eg , park or open space ) . one source indicates that all states within the contiguous united states contain land classified as wui . see figure 1 . furthermore , approximately 10% of all land within the lower 48 states is classified as wui , with a significant concentration along the east coast , although western states have the highest proportions of their homes in the wui . the area of intermix communities is large and is growing faster than the area of interface communities , based on data from 1990 to 2000 . nationwide , in 2010 , the interface area was equal to approximately 39 million acres , and the intermix area equal to approximately 152 million acres . in 2010 , intermix communities in the three pacific coast states totaled 9.3 million acres , almost three times the 3.6 million acres in interface communities in those states . from 1990 to 2000 , the 10-year growth in area of intermix communities was 14.1% , compared to only 2.5% for interface communities . however , the study acknowledged that determining the area of wui communities was imprecise: "mapping [the federal register ] definition of the wui using data and operational definitions we developed , we arrived at one possible representation of the wui. the intermingled nature of intermix communities poses significant challenges for fire protection efforts . in most of the united states , wildfires are inevitable . biomass plus dry conditions equals fuel to burn . crown fires do not consume all the biomass ; rather , a crown fire quickly burns the needles or leaves and small twigs and limbs on the surface and throughout the crown of the trees . because the needles and leaves in the crown are green , they require more energy to burn than dry fuels on the surface . furthermore , because of the green fuels and the often discontinuous biomass of the canopy , wind is usually needed to sustain a crown fire . once burning vigorously , a crown fire can create its own wind — the strong upward convection of the heated air can draw in cooler air from surrounding areas , thus creating a wind that feeds the fire .