various solutions were proposed . many suggested fewer overseas commitments , but no administration stemmed demands for u.s. forces . congress mandated the department of defense ( dod ) to compensate soldiers who were deployed too long or too often , but september 11 , 2001 , caused that law to be waived . technological advances made transforming u.s. forces more combat effective against conventional forces , but could not substitute for manpower needed in the unconventional and asymmetric environments of "stability" operations . in contrast , some charged that the army , in particular , was resisting such "constabulary" operations and therefore managed its personnel inefficiently . the combat phase of the 2003 iraq war was won quickly with fewer forces than many analysts expected . the occupation phase , however , soon involved some 220,000 troops . at the first anniversary of combat , dod staged the "largest troop rotation since world war ii. all active army divisions were involved . indicators that forces were stretched thin included reserve component and marine corps units committed for over a year ( shorter tours had been the norm ) ; many personnel came under "stop - loss" orders that kept them from leaving service , were extended in their tours , or were ordered to multiple combat tours . ceremonial companies from the old guard in arlington , va , were deployed to djibouti , and no army division was available as a strategic reserve ( air and naval forces were shifted to cover key contingencies ) . a house bill was introduced to increase the armed forces by 83,700 personnel for five years . various senators proposed either adding one army and one marine division or permanently increasing the army by 10,000 soldiers . no decreases to end strength have been proposed . whether from internal or external pressure , in january 2004 , dod responded . before the house armed services committee on january 28 , 2004 , chief of staff of the army , general peter schoomaker , testified that he had been authorized by the secretary of defense to increase end strength of the army by 30,000 personnel on a temporary , emergency basis . he argued that a permanent , legislated increase would be unwise and unnecessary . he asserted that a permanent increase would create a burden on planned defense budgets in the out years , citing $1.2 billion annually for each increase of 10,000 troops . some ongoing programs were presented as , over time , providing a more efficient and usable force structure within current army end strength . general schoomaker began making organizational changes shortly after he became chief of staff in august 2003 . he ordered divisions to create more combat "modules" by forming four new brigades from their existing three brigades and divisional support forces . once implemented , this would provide 10 additional brigade - equivalent maneuver elements for the rotation base . including planned stryker brigades could eventually raise the number of brigades available from 33 to 48 . he is pursuing a "unit manning" policy , rather than rotating individuals to deployed units .