algeria's economy is dominated by the state . algeria plays a prominent role in the african union ( au ) . algerian politicians are generally extremely critical of israel and of israeli policy toward the palestinians . algeria's leaders criticized nato's intervention in libya and have urged a non - interventionist approach to the conflict in syria . algeria is influential in mali , and has mediated peace talks between the malian government and northern rebel groups . relations with morocco are strained over the issue of western sahara and due to a rivalry for regional power . the western sahara is a disputed territory claimed and largely administered by morocco ; algeria hosts and supports the independence - seeking popular front for the liberation of saqiat al hamra and rio de oro ( polisario ) and its self - declared government - in - exile , the sahrawi arab democratic republic . tens of thousands of sahrawi ( as the people of western sahara are known ) live in refugee camps in the tindouf area of southwest algeria . the camps receive aid from the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) but are administered by the polisario . algeria considers the western sahara issue to be one of decolonization requiring resolution by the u.n. , and maintains that it is not a party to the conflict . talks between morocco and the polisario have been conducted under u.n. auspices since 2007 , with no significant break - through . algeria has not reopened its border with morocco since closing it in 1994 , after morocco imposed visa restrictions on algerian nationals and blamed algeria for a terrorist attack . algeria and france , its former colonizer , have complex , unpredictable relations . economic ties are extensive , and millions of individuals of algerian descent live in france . yet france's restrictive immigration policies and the weight of history continue to trouble the relationship . french president françois hollande has pursued warmer ties , conducting a high - profile visit to algeria in 2012 . periodic unrest in kabylie has been fueled by perceived official discrimination and neglect . aqim activity in the region and related security measures have also made it difficult for businesses to operate in the area , entrenching its economic isolation . hydrocarbons ( oil and gas ) are the engine of the algerian economy , providing about two - thirds of public revenues , one - third of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) , and over 90% of export earnings . algeria is the leading natural gas producer in africa and among the top three oil producers in africa , and is the second - largest natural gas supplier to europe . oil and gas production have declined in recent years , and known hydrocarbon resources are projected to be depleted over the next 50 years . however , algeria is expanding exploration , including of shale gas , of which it is estimated to hold the world's third - largest recoverable resources .