this legislation was not reported from committee . should the 110 th congress undertake further consideration of the potential tanker / nuclear threat , issues that may garner attention include: ( 1 ) how might port security grant programs enhance tanker security ? ( 2 ) could imaging or radiation - detection systems available now , or deployable in the near future , significantly augment tanker security against this threat ? ( 3 ) if so , is it worth the money to deploy them now , or would it be preferable to wait until more advanced systems were available ? ( 4 ) if not , does the current r&d investment strategy consider tanker security , and what detection programs might be developed to do so ? these questions might be raised as congress oversees implementation of the safe port act , p.l . these ships merit attention as well because terrorists will look for the weak link . the 9 / 11 commission stressed the importance of a balanced approach to maritime security . to this end , this report focuses on the threat of a terrorist nuclear attack using oil tanker ships . this threat is of particular interest because the middle east is the chief source of anti - u.s. terrorism . on january 24 , 2005 , s. 12 , targeting terrorists more effectively act of 2005 , was introduced and was referred to the senate committee on foreign relations . section 325 provides for a tanker security initiative under which "[t]he secretary of homeland security shall establish a tanker security initiative to promulgate and enforce standards and carry out activities to ensure that tanker vessels that transport oil , natural gas , or other materials are not used by terrorists or as carriers of weapons of mass destruction. as part of this initiative , the secretary may develop standards to prevent terrorists from placing weapons of mass destruction on tankers , develop detection equipment and inspection procedures , conduct r&d on sensors to detect a nuclear device on a tanker , and aid foreign countries in carrying out provisions of this initiative . the legislation would also require the secretary to submit a report to congress on terrorism risks posed by tankers , means of combating this risk , and a proposed budget to carry out this initiative . some fear that a container - borne atomic bomb detonated in a u.s. port could wreak economic as well as physical havoc . robert bonner , former head of customs and border protection ( cbp ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , has argued that such an attack would lead to a halt to container traffic worldwide for some time , bringing the world economy to its knees . stephen flynn , a retired coast guard commander and an expert on maritime security at the council on foreign relations , holds a similar view . while container ships accounted for 30.4% of vessel calls to u.s. ports in 2005 , other ships carried crude oil ( 12.9% ) , dry bulk cargo ( 18.7% ) , and vehicles ( 6.0% ) , among other things .