cuba . with regard to cuba , h.r . 274 ( rush ) , introduced in january 2015 , would , among its provisions , have rescinded any determination of the secretary of state that cuba has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism . as noted above , in may 2015 , president obama rescinded cuba's designation as a state sponsor of terrorism and congress did not take any legislative action to block the administration's action . as discussed above , for a number of years , the state department had noted in its annual terrorism report cuba's harboring of fugitives wanted in the united states . the house - passed version of the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) , h.r . 4909 , had a provision that would have prohibited funds in the act for any bilateral military - to - military contact or cooperation pending certification from the secretaries of state and defense that cuba has fulfilled numerous conditions , including cuba's return of u.s. fugitives wanted by the department of justice ; ultimately the language regarding fugitives was not included in the conference report to the fy2017 ndaa ( h.rept . among other initiatives: h.res . 181 ( king ) , introduced in march 2015 , would have called for the immediate extradition or rendering to the united states of all fugitives from justice who are receiving safe harbor in cuba to escape prosecution or confinement for criminal offenses in the united states ; h.r . 2937 ( nunes ) / s. 1489 ( rubio ) , introduced in june 2015 , included a provision that would have called for the attorney general , in coordination with the secretary of state , to work with interpol to pursue the location and arrest of u.s. fugitives from justice in cuba ; and h.r . 4772 ( pearce ) , introduced in march 2016 , would have prohibited funding to accept commercial flight plans between the united states and cuba until cuba extradited u.s. fugitives from justice . another bill , h.r . 2189 ( smith , nj ) , would have required a report from the president regarding information on u.s. fugitives from justice abroad ( not just cuba ) and u.s. efforts to secure the return of such fugitives . mexico . in april 2016 , the house approved h.r . the southcom commander usually testifies before the armed services committees annually . in presenting the command's 2016 posture statement to congress in march 2016 , admiral kurt tidd testified that "as a state sponsor of terrorism , iran's nefarious involvement in the western hemisphere is a matter for concern. he also noted a number of individuals and families leaving the region to join the islamic state in syria or iraq . the same argument can be made regarding efforts to combat money laundering in the region . u.s. attention to terrorism issues in latin america increased in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks on new york and washington . antiterrorism assistance increased along with bilateral and regional cooperation against terrorism .