tunisia has a diverse economy and large middle class . textile exports , tourism , agriculture , and phosphate mining are key sectors . tunisia also produces some petroleum , but is a net energy - importer . until recently , tunisia was an upper - middle - income country . strong annual growth prior to 2011 , however , masked corruption and inequalities that fed discontent . the department of defense ( dod ) has provided substantial additional military aid , focused on counterterrorism and border security ( table 2 , below ) . notably , after president ben ali was pushed out of office in 2011 , the world bank documented that government regulations had been manipulated to favor firms closely tied to the ben ali family . more broadly , wealth is concentrated along the urban and tourist - friendly coast , while the interior suffers from relative poverty and a lack of investment . a cabinet reshuffle the same month saw the appointment of new ministers with ties to the ben ali regime . president caïd essebsi later suggested on national television that he was considering changing the constitution , deepening some observers' concerns that his apparent efforts to strengthen the presidency could undermine democratic consolidation . in may 2018 , tunisia held landmark local elections to fill posts created under a new political decentralization law . the accomplishment of holding elections , which had been repeatedly delayed , arguably restored a sense of momentum on political reforms . the elections are viewed by many observers as a key step toward more accountable governance as well as a means to address "long - standing issues of dramatic regional disparity" in health care , education , poverty , and infrastructure — although the concrete devolution of policymaking and fiscal authority is likely to be a long - term process at best . turnout was low at 34% , which some attributed to political apathy among young people . al nahda won 29% of votes , followed by nidaa tounes at 21% , but independent lists collectively outpolled both leading parties , garnering 32% nationally . the contours of future political competition are uncertain ahead of national elections due in 2019 . nidaa tounes , whose base includes business leaders , trade unionists , arab nationalists , and former - regime figures , has struggled to contain its ideological and individual fractures . the president , 92 , has not stated whether he will run for another five - year term in 2019 . the decision to ally with al nahda was controversial within the party , leading several senior figures to leave and form a breakaway parliamentary group . prime minister youssef chahed , who has sought to impose fiscal austerity measures , has come under pressure from trade unions to resign , and as of mid - 2018 he appeared to be in a power struggle with president caïd essebsi . perceptions that the president is positioning his son , hafedh , currently head of nidaa tounes , to succeed him have also sparked public backlash and splits within the ruling party .