agriculture . ( 9 ) agriculture negotiations are part of the ongoing negotiations , a built - in agenda of talks thatwere incorporated into the launch of the doha round . the negotiations involve the "three pillars" of agriculturesupport: market access ( tariffs ) , exportsubsidies , and production subsidies . the emphasis of the u.s. negotiating position has been market access . theinitial u.s. agriculture proposal includedsignificant tariff reduction based on a non - linear formula that would cap individual tariff lines at 25% . the proposalalso called for a complete elimination ofexport subsidies and a harmonization of trade - distorting domestic support to 5% of a country's total agriculturalproduct . the initial european union proposal adopted a linear formula approach to tariff reductions and subsidies used in the uruguay round . the linear approachwould reduce tariffs and subsidies by a fixed percentage cut , thus leaving the relative subsidy and tariff ratesunchanged between trading partners . reaction . subsequent to the collapse of the talks , u.s. and eu negotiators criticized both the substance andtactics of the g - 20+ group . a u.s. negotiator claimed that developing country rhetoric was more suited to the unitednations , while others claimed that theg - 20+ lacked a negotiating strategy other than making demands on developed countries . however , one g - 20+ trademinister has suggested that the position ofthe g - 20+ merely represented the paramount interest of its members in breaking down the agricultural barriers andsubsidies in the united states and the eu . u.s. reaction to the collapse of the talks has been to give increased emphasis to the negotiation of bilateral and regional free trade agreements ( fta ) . u.s. traderepresentative robert zoellick said that the united states would negotiate with what he called "can - do" countriesrather than "won't - do" countries . ( 3 ) therewere also calls by some members of congress to oppose bilateral or regional negotiations with countries of theg - 20+ , leading some g - 20+ participantsnegotiating ftas with the united states , including guatemala , costa rica , peru , colombia , and thailand , todissociate themselves from their g - 20+activities . ( 4 ) the european union has undertaken a review of its policy towards the wto and multilateral trade negotiations . one issue that may be discussed in this reviewis the future emphasis that the eu places on the singapore issues . while eu negotiators agreed to drop demandsthat negotiations proceed on all but the tradefacilitation issue at cancún , the lack of agreement on that agenda may result in renewed eu insistence onthe full singapore agenda . the eu may also decide toplay the regional card by placing renewed emphasis on ongoing negotiations with mercosur or with former coloniesin the african , caribbean and pacificgroup . eu officials have also made public statements on the need to reform various aspects of the wto'sdecision - making process . ( 5 ) some participants from g - 20+ countries returned from cancún claiming the outcome was a victory for developing countries . to them , the lack of agreementwas evidence that they had successfully defended their national interests in demanding changes in the agriculturalpolicies of developed countries .