observations . they were overruled . caib concluded that "both accidents were 'failures of foresight'" and the parallels betweenthem demonstrate that: "the causes of theinstitutional failure responsible for challenger have not been fixed" ; "if these persistent , systemic flawsare not resolved , the scene is set for another accident" ; and that while individuals must be accountable for their actions , "nasa's problems cannot be solved simply byretirements , resignations , or transferringpersonnel. what caused the columbia accident ? the board "recognized early on that the accident was probably not ananomalous , random event , but rather likely rooted to some degree in nasa's history and the human space flightprogram's culture. ( p. 9 ) therefore , it alsolooked at "political and budgetary considerations , compromises , and changing priorities over the life" of the shuttleprogram , and "places as much weight onthese causal factors as on the ... physical cause...." ( p. 9 ) the physical cause was damage to columbia' s left wing by a 1.7 pound piece of insulating foam that detached from the left "bipod ramp" that connects theexternal tank ( 1 ) to the orbiter , and struck the orbiter'sleft wing 81.9 seconds after launch . the foam strike created a hole in a reinforced carbon - carbon ( rcc ) panel on the leading edge of the wing , allowing superheated air ( perhaps exceeding 5,000 o f ) to enter the wing during reentry . the extreme heat causedthe wing to fail structurally , creating aerodynamic forces that led to the disintegration of the orbiter . ( described indetail in chapters 2 and 3. ) regarding organizational causes , the board concluded the accident was - - ... rooted in the space shuttle program's history and culture , including the original compromises that were requiredto gain approval for the shuttle , subsequent years of resource constraints , fluctuating priorities , schedule pressures,mischaracterization of the shuttle asoperational rather than developmental , and lack of an agreed national vision for human space flight . cultural traitsand organizational practices detrimental tosafety were allowed to develop , including: reliance on past success as a substitute for sound engineering practices...,organizational barriers that preventedeffective communication of critical safety information and stifled professional differences of opinion ; lack ofintegrated management across program elements ; and the evolution of an informal chain of command and decision - making processes that operated outside theorganization's rules . ( p.9 ) the board found that there is a "broken safety culture " at nasa ( pp . schedule pressure ( pp . 131-139 ) related to construction of the internationalspace station , budget constraints ( pp . 102-105 ) , and workforce reductions ( pp . 106-110 ) also were factors . the board concluded that the shuttle program"has operated in a challenging and often turbulent environment...." ( p. 118 ) "it is to the credit of space shuttlemanagers and the shuttle workforce that thevehicle was able to achieve its program objectives for as long as it did. ( p. 119 ) should the shuttle continue to fly ? the board concluded that "the present shuttle is not inherently unsafe"but the "observations and recommendations in this report are needed to make the vehicle safe enough to operate inthe coming years.