analytical quality . the key test for homeland security will of course be the quality of the analytical product - - whether terrorist groups can be identified and timely warning givenof plans for attacks on the u.s. a critical need exists for trained personnel . the types of information that have tobe analyzed come from disparate sources and require a variety of analytical skills that are not in plentiful supply . academic institutions prepare significant numbers of linguists and area specialists , but training in the inner workingsof clandestine terrorist entities is less often undertaken . analysts with law enforcement backgrounds may not beattuned to the foreign environments from which terrorist groups emerge . in july 2003 dhs had only some 53analysts and liaison officials with plans to increase this number to about 150 . president bush , in his state of the union address delivered on january 28 , 2003 , called for the establishment of a new terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) that would merge and analyze all threat information in a singlelocation under the direction of the dci . the question of "raw" intelligence . ttic's stated responsibilities are to "integrate terrorist - related informationcollected domestically and abroad" and to provide "terrorist threat assessments for our national leadership. ( 11 ) onmay 1 , 2003 , ttic began operations at cia headquarters under the leadership of john o. brennan , who hadpreviously served as the cia's deputy executive director . by july 2003 , it consisted of some 100 analysts andliaisonofficials with plans to increase to 300 by may 2004 . ( 12 ) ttic appears to be designed to assume at least some of the functions intended for dhs' information analysis division . representative cox , chairman of the select committee on homeland security , has welcomed theestablishment of ttic , while noting that "the establishment of the center in no way reduces the statutoryobligations of the department [of homeland security] to build its own analytic capability . reports from human agents present special challenges . someassessment of the reliability of the source would have to be provided , but information that would identify a specificindividual is normally retained within a very small circle of intelligence officials so as to reduce the risk ofunauthorized disclosure and harm to the source . the issue of the extent and nature of information forwarded to dhs has proved to be difficult . reviewing copies of summary reports prepared by existing agencies is seen by some observers as inadequate for the task ofputtingtogether a meaningful picture of terrorist capabilities and intentions and providing timely warning . on the otherhand , there is a need to ensure that dhs would not be inundated with vast quantities of data and that highly sensitiveinformation is not given wider dissemination than absolutely necessary . according to administration spokesmen , ttic will eventually encompasscia's counterterrorist center ( ctc ) and the fbi's counterterrorism division , along with elements of otheragencies , including dod and dhs . ( 13 ) " making the dci responsiblefor ttic will facilitate its ability to use highly sensitive classified information and ttic can expand upon therelationships that have evolved in the ctc that was established in cia's operations directorate in the mid - 1980s .