successive u.s . administrations and many members of congress have long backed eu enlargement , believing that it serves u.s. interests by advancing democracy and economic prosperity , and thereby creating strong european political allies and trading partners . following the collapse of communism in 1989 , u.s. and eu officials worked in close cooperation to promote democratic transitions and market - oriented reforms , with both sides of the atlantic routinely asserting that the countries of central and eastern europe would be warmly welcomed into euro - atlantic institutions such as the eu , as well as nato , but only if they met the necessary political and economic criteria . some analysts suggest that u.s. policy makers have also been keen to promote eu enlargement because they have viewed it as a way to decrease u.s. - eu tensions given that many of the newer members are often regarded as more pro - american . moreover , many u.s. officials hoped that with the eu's enlargement to the east and the transformation of the continent nearly complete , the eu would turn its attention outward and be a more capable partner for the united states in tackling a range of global challenges . u.s. business and commercial interests have also generally favored eu enlargement , believing that it would provide access to a larger , more integrated european market , and that it would help further reforms of the eu's regulatory regime and common agricultural policy , frequent sources of u.s. - eu trade conflicts . over the years , the only significant u.s. criticism of the eu's enlargement process has been that the union was moving too slowly , especially with respect to turkey . successive u.s . administrations and many members of congress have long advocated eu membership for turkey , viewing it as a vital , strategic ally that should be anchored firmly to europe . at times , washington has played an active , albeit small , role in turkey's eu accession path ; in 1999 , for example , the clinton administration reportedly lobbied ankara to accept the eu's offer to recognize turkey as an official eu candidate , despite ankara's unhappiness that the eu had not set out a timetable for accession talks . periodically , however , u.s. pressure to promote turkey's eu accession prospects has generated tensions with the eu . the united states continues to support turkey's eu membership bid , as well as the eu aspirations of the western balkans . in the midst of the recent protests and violence in ukraine , u.s. officials and some members of congress have stressed u.s. backing for those in ukraine who see the country's future as being aligned with europe . at the same time , u.s. policy makers realize that eu enlargement moves at its own pace , and that eu accession for turkey and other countries is still many years away . some u.s. officials remain concerned that "enlargement fatigue," as well as the eu's financial crisis , could hinder additional eu expansion . other commentators argue that eu enlargement could have some negative implications for u.s. interests .