the fund is administered by the office of management and budget . following procedures required by the act , the fcc scheduled an auction for advanced wireless services ( aws ) , designated auction 66 , which was completed on september 18 , 2006 . the aws auction attracted nearly $13.9 billion in completed bids , substantially above the cost established by the ntia of almost $936 million for the move . the fcc ruled that auction winners wishing to put acquired licenses to immediate use would in most cases be able to share with current federal users under guidance from the fcc . at a washington , dc , conference in september 2007 , john kneuer , director of the ntia at the time , told the audience that there were some "issues" on relocating federal users to clear space for commercial license - holders . to facilitate the clearing of spectrum for revenue - generating auctions , the 109 th congress included measures in a budget reconciliation bill to create a fund to hold the proceeds from congressionally mandated auctions of licenses in the 700 mhz band . the fund and disbursements are administered by the ntia , which is directed in the act to make specific disbursements . these are: $7,363 million from the auction of spectrum licenses at 700 mhz is slated go to reduce the budget deficit as specified in h.con.res . 95 up to $1,500 million on coupons for households toward the purchase of tv set top boxes that can convert digital broadcast signals for display on analog sets ; a grant program of up to $1,000 million to improve communications capabilities for public safety agencies ; payments of up to $30 million toward the cost of temporary digital transmission equipment for broadcasters serving the metropolitan new york area ; payments of up to $10 million to help low - power television stations purchase equipment that will convert full - power broadcast signals from digital to analog ; a program funded up to $65 million to reimburse low - power television stations in rural areas for upgrading equipment from analog to digital technology ; up to $106 million to implement a unified national alert system and $50 million for a tsunami warning and coastal vulnerability program ; contributions totaling no more than $43.5 million for a national 911 improvement program established by the enhance 911 act of 2004 ; and up to $30 million in support of the essential air service program . the ntia was authorized to finance some of the programs through loans from the treasury , secured by the expected proceeds of the auction required by the law . some of the funding provisions were later amended as regards timing of payments and use of funds but the amounts were not changed . total legislated disbursements are slightly more than $10 billion , to stay within an estimate of auction revenue of approximately $12 billion , as originally provided by the congressional budget office .