they have no place in iran's defense doctrine. iranian government spokesman gholam hussein elham said in july 2006 that the islamic republic will never produce weapons of mass destruction . at the same time , supreme leader ali khamanei said in november 2004 that iran would not "give up" its enrichment "at any price" and former president khatami stated in march 2005 that ending iran's uranium enrichment program is "completely unacceptable. uranium enrichment can be used for both peaceful ( nuclear fuel ) and military ( nuclear weapons ) uses . however , two decades of clandestine activities have raised questions about iran's intentions , and many have called for iran to rebuild world confidence by refraining from enrichment and reprocessing , perhaps indefinitely . that said , iran has pursued three different methods of enriching uranium and has experimented with separating plutonium , suggesting a steady accrual of expertise in weapons - relevant areas , according to some observers . if iran received the same nuclear weapon design that a.q . khan gave libya , the remaining technical hurdle ( albeit the most difficult ) would be fissile material production . on january 18 , 2007 , then - dni negroponte told members of congress that , "our assessment is that tehran is determined to develop nuclear weapons . it is continuing to pursue uranium enrichment and has shown more interest in protracting negotiations than reaching an acceptable diplomatic solution. calculations of nuclear weapons production are generally based on estimates of fissile material production . one calculation is that a cascade of 1000 p - 1 centrifuges could produce one bomb's worth of heu ( 25 kg ) in 2.2 to 2.7 years ; and that a cascade of 3000 p - 1 centrifuges could produce the same amount in 271-330 days . in april 2005 , iran said that unless negotiations progressed , it would start up its uranium conversion plant , which it did in august 2005 . following iranian president ahmadinejad's inflammatory remarks at the september 2005 u.n . summit , the iaea board voted on resolution gov / 2005 / 77 , which found iran in noncompliance with its safeguards agreement . specifically , the board found that "iran's many failures and breaches of its obligations to comply with its npt safeguards agreement , as detailed in gov / 2003 / 75 , constitute noncompliance in the context of article xii.c of the agency's statute. for several months thereafter , iran provided limited details on outstanding issues and discussed , with russia , an offer to conduct uranium enrichment on russian soil as an alternative to indigenous production . in january 2006 , iran abandoned its voluntary suspension of enrichment - related activities negotiations , as well as the interim application of the additional protocol , prompting an emergency board meeting . an iaea report prepared for the meeting linked , for the first time , a khan network document in iran's possession on uranium casting and machining to the fabrication of nuclear weapons components . iran asserts that the khan network provided the document on its own initiative .