laws governing each of these areas are described below . as noted above , the csa is a federal statute that establishes criminal and civil sanctions for the unlawful possession , manufacturing , distribution , or importation of controlled substances . the primary purpose of the csa is to facilitate the legal distribution of controlled substances for legitimate medical purposes while preventing their diversion for illegal uses . although the csa is generally known for prohibiting illegal drugs that have a high potential for abuse and no accepted medical use , such as heroin or cocaine , the statute also covers a range of other drugs that have a lesser potential for abuse and an accepted medical use , including certain prescription drugs . although most prescription drugs are not controlled substances and therefore are not regulated under the csa , some prescription drugs , such as narcotics and opiates that are often used in the treatment of pain , are regulated under the csa because they have a greater potential for abuse than other prescription drugs and may lead to physical dependence . it is the latter category of prescription painkillers that appears to be among the drugs most heavily dispensed by certain internet pharmacies in accordance with prescriptions that are issued based on online questionnaires . this practice has sometimes been abused by rogue sites that dispense large quantities of addictive substances to customers apparently seeking access to prescription painkillers , and it has led to instances of addiction , overdose , and death . in response to cases in which online doctors have written thousands of prescriptions for controlled substances without examining their patients , the federal government has begun prosecuting certain doctors under the csa by charging them with the illegal distribution of controlled substances . penalties under the csa vary depending on the amount and type of substance involved but generally include monetary fines , forfeiture , and imprisonment . as noted above , prescription drugs are also regulated by the fda under the ffdca . although state law also governs the prescribing of drugs , the ffdca covers certain aspects of the prescribing process , including the requirement that prescription drugs may not be dispensed without a valid prescription . if a doctor violates a state law or regulation , state medical boards generally have the authority to fine or otherwise discipline the doctor through modification , suspension , or revocation of the doctor's license to practice medicine in that state . in reality , however , laws regarding medical practice vary widely in strength and effectiveness from state to state . while some states have strong laws that explicitly prohibit activities such as prescribing drugs without conducting an in - person examination , other states have weak laws , lax enforcement , or both . like nabp , fsmb has developed a specific policy with regard to online pharmacies and doctors that prescribe drugs over the internet . according to fsmb's model guidelines on the subject , electronic technology "should supplement and enhance , but not replace , crucial interpersonal interactions that create the very basis of the physician - patient relationship.