the president flies on one of the 747s on most of his trips . occasionally , he will use a smaller plane when the area he is visiting cannot accommodate a 747 . "air force one" is the designation given to whatever plane the president is using at the time . the product of that calculation represents the amount to be reimbursed to the government . other factors may result in adjustments to any amount of reimbursement . for example , if a traveling party would have returned to the point of departure on a given day , but delayed its return one day ( or more ) because of a political activity , then the cost of accommodations is to be assessed solely to the political sponsor . sometimes it is difficult to determine whether a trip , or part of a trip , should be characterized as official or unofficial . this is especially the case when a trip involves certain activities having partisan consequences , because an inherent part of the official duties of the president and vice president involves their efforts to present , explain , and secure public support for their policies and goals . when they travel and appear in public to defend their policy positions , the difference between their official duties and their activities as leaders of their political party can be difficult to assess . as a result , the white house decides the nature of travel on a case - by - case basis , attempting to determine whether each trip , or part of a trip , is or is not official by considering the nature of the event involved , and the role of the individual involved . it is unclear how the white house designates travel that is not directly related to a governmental or political function , because of traditional reluctance to address this matter . it appears that , in most cases , such travel is treated as official , under the assumption that the president and vice president are always on duty . vacation trips , for example , fall under the official travel category . security considerations and the need to be able to communicate instantly with military and other officials at any time are the reasons the president flies on a military aircraft when he travels . moreover , having a military plane readily available enables the president to fly whenever and wherever he may wish to go . security considerations are also the primary reason for use of military aircraft by the vice president and first lady . airfare and related travel expenses associated with the trips taken by the president , vice president , and first lady are only a fraction of the total cost of such trips . most of the costs involve operational costs of the aircraft , and include fuel , maintenance , engineering support , and per diem expenses for the crew . the military aircraft used by the white house are operated by the 89 th airlift wing ( aw ) located at andrews air force base in maryland , just outside washington , dc .