1350 has been criticized . the minority views in the committee report argued for removal of the language stating: "there is noquestion that this will limit access to knowledgeable and experienced legal representation by the people who needit the most - low income , inexperienced parents seeking to obtain thebest education for their children with disabilities. the senate bill would keep the same general framework as is in current law ; a federal district court may , in its discretion , award reasonable attorneys' fees as part of the costs to theparents of a child with a disability who is the prevailing party . however , < 108 > the senate bill would make somechanges . the senate bill would add a requirement for apreliminary meeting prior to a due process hearing to provide an opportunity to resolve the complaint and the billspecifically provides that attorneys' fees are not available for thispreliminary meeting . in addition , the bill would add language to the provision on the reduction of attorneys' feesclarifying that if the parents' attorney does not provide the requiredinformation to the local educational agency , the court shall reduce the attorneys' fees . the senate bill would add a new subsection specifically allowing parents to represent their children in court . generally , an individual has a right to proceed as his or her own counsel infederal court . ( 13 ) rule 17 of the federal rules ofcivil procedure precludes minors from proceeding pro se although a representative or guardian maysue on the minor's behalf . however , several circuits have held that the right to proceed pro se in federal court does not give parentswho are not attorneys the right to represent their children . ( 14 ) the idea casesthat have specifically addressed this issue have generally found that parents cannot proceed pro se onbehalf of their child . ( 15 ) the leading case is collinsgru v. palmyra board ofeducation where the third circuit held that "parents seeking to enforce their child's substantive right to anappropriate education under the idea may not represent their child in federalcourt. ( 16 ) however , in a detailed examination ofthe issue , the first circuit declined to follow collinsgru . in maroni v. pemi - baker regionalschool district , the court held that parentsdo have procedural and substantive rights under idea since they are "parties aggrieved" because they are able torequest due process hearings "and thus are logically within the groupsof 'parties aggrieved' given the right to sue. ( 17 ) the senate bill does not state whether or not parents who represent their children in court have a right to attorneys'fees . generally,under current law , even if the parent is a licensed attorney , attorneys' fees have not been allowed in pro se cases . ( 18 ) an amendment on attorneys' fees was agreed to on the senate floor which would allow the court to award fees to a sea or lea against the attorney of a parent or a parent in certaincircumstances .