this includes any cost - share payments . crp rental payments are regarded by the internal revenue service ( irs ) as income from the business of farming . similar pressures on usda are again appearing in 2011 . if rental rates are too low , there is some chance that producers will decline to enroll their land , or , if enrolled , will decline to renew their contracts at expiration . putting crp acreage back into production could have significant environmental effects . although land put back into production would have to be managed under an environmental plan to be eligible for various agricultural assistance programs , there could still be an environmental cost in terms of increased sediment losses and nitrogen and phosphorus run - off if fragile land were put back into production . the decline in commodity prices from their 2008 highs reduced the pressures on producers to terminate their contracts . the 2008 farm bill ( section 2110 ) directs usda to conduct an annual survey of per - acre estimates of the average market dry land and irrigated land cash rental rates and to post these rates on a publicly accessible usda website . a 2011 study by ers modeled the effect on crp of increasing commodity prices , including one pricing scenario that examined the effects on crp of 15 billion gallons of crop - based biofuels production . using national resources inventory data to simulate offers under general sign - ups , the study suggested that maintaining crp under its current configuration could lead to significant expenditure increases for the program . when constraints were placed on increasing rental rates , the study suggested that enrollment goals could be met with moderate increases in the crp rental rates . the latter scenario might mean that enrollment goals could be met , but at the cost of applying a lower ebi , as producers with profitable , but environmentally sensitive , acreage choose not to enroll . under current law , a producer wishing to terminate a contract early faces a penalty fee of 25% on rental payments paid , plus repayment , with interest , of all the funds already paid to the producer . as such , they are subject to self - employment social security taxes . producers , however , would like to treat crp payments as rental income not subject to the self - employment tax of 15.3% . the irs position was supported by the sixth circuit court in march 2000 in wuebker v. commissioner , 205 f.3d897 . in december 2006 , the irs issued notice 2006-108 reinforcing its position that crp payments are subject to self - employment taxes . section 15301 of the 2008 farm bill exempts crp payments from self - employment taxes for disabled and retired contract holders after december 31 , 2007 . retiring land in rural , largely agricultural economies could result in fewer farmers and fewer farming - related jobs in these areas . a usda report found that , although high crp enrollment was associated with some job loss in rural areas between 1986 and 1992 — the years the crp was first underway — this was generally not the case during the 1990s .