and refined others . in summary,the document committed india to a credible minimum deterrent,defined as: 1. a posture of "no first use" and no use against non - nuclear weapon states , with the exception of theright to retaliate with nuclear weapons against a "major attack againstindia , or indian forces anywhere , by biological or chemical weapons ; " 2 . civil control in the form of the primeminister as head of the nuclear command authority ; 3 . nuclearretaliation against a first strike as massive and designed to inflict unacceptable damage . ( 7 ) the document described the nuclear command authority as being composedof a politicalcouncil ( chaired by the prime minister and authorize the use of nuclear weapons ) and an executive council ( chairedby the national security advisor ) . pakistan's nuclear program dates back to the 1950s , but it was the humiliating loss of east pakistan ( now bangladesh ) that reportedly triggered a political decision in january 1972 ( justone month later ) to begin a crash nuclear weapons program . unlike india , pakistan focused on the uranium routeto weapons . pakistan sought technology from many sources , includingchina and north korea . ( 8 ) this extensive assistanceis reported to have included , among other things , uranium enrichment technology from europe , blueprints for asmall nuclearweapon from china and missile technology from china . most observers estimate that pakistan has enough nuclear material ( highly enriched uranium and a small amount of plutonium ) for 30 to 50 nuclear weapons . ( 9 ) likeindia , pakistan isthought to have "a small stockpile of nuclear weapons components and can probably assemble some weapons fairlyquickly. ( 10 ) pakistan could deliver its nuclear weapons using f - 16s it purchased from the united states ( 28 f - 16 and 12 trainer aircraft ; 8 are no longer in service ) , provided the appropriate "wiring"has been added to make them nuclear - capable . in the 1980s , pakistan moved assiduously to acquire ballistic missilecapabilities and now deploys short - range ballistic missiles and asmall number of medium - range missiles . aq khan , former head of khan research laboratories , maintained thatonly the medium - range ghauri missiles would be usable in a nuclearexchange ( given fall - out effects for pakistan of shorter - range missiles ) . other observers view the 30 to 50 hatf2 short - range ( 300km ) missiles ( modified chinese m - 11s ) as potentialdelivery vehicles for nuclear weapons . ghauri missiles ( 1350 and 2300km ) , which reportedly are basedon the north korean no - dong and taepo - dong - 1 , are capable of reaching newdelhi with large payloads . ( 11 ) pakistan has not yet enunciated a nuclear doctrine , but it is clear that pakistan's nuclear arsenal is seen as the key to military parity with india . because of its fears of being overrun bylarger indian forces , pakistan has rejected the doctrine of no - first - use . in may 2002 , pakistan's ambassador to theun , munir akram , stated that "we have not said we will use nuclearweapons . we have not said we will not use nuclear weapons .