( 5 stat . the apportionment act of 1872 added another requirement to those first set out in 1842 , stating that districts should contain " as nearly as practicable an equal number of inhabitants. ( 17 stat . a further requirement of "compact territory" was added when the apportionment act of 1901 was adopted stating that districts must be made up of " contiguous and compact territory and containing as nearly as practicable an equal number of inhabitants. ( 26 stat . on the other hand , in a second concurrence ( written by justice stevens , joined by justices souter and breyer ) , a separate plurality of the court , while agreeing that the district court properly enjoined enforcement of the state court's plan and drew its own single - member plan under 2 u.s.c . ยง 2c , concluded that section 2c "impliedly repealed" section 2a ( c ) . in a dissent , justice o'connor , ( joined by justice thomas ) , found that when federal courts are asked to redistrict states that have lost representation after a reapportionment , and the existing plan has more districts than the new allocation permits and no new plan has been promulgated with the correct number of districts , the courts are required to order at - large elections in accordance with 2 u.s.c . ยง 2a ( c ) . it could be argued that at - large elections will not be needed in the post - 1960s era because the courts now intervene when the states reach impasse and fail to redistrict following the decennial census . nevertheless , since the issue of whether federal law permits at - large congressional representation appears unsettled , if a house delegation were elected at large , it appears that their seating could be challenged in the house of representatives on the grounds that their election violates section 2c , which prohibits at - large elections . a challenged delegation might raise the defense that since congress did not expressly repeal the contingencies enumerated in section 2a ( c ) when it enacted section 2c , it has therefore recognized the possibility of an at - large delegation , which should be seated , despite having been elected in violation of section 2c . perhaps the best argument that the single - member district requirement might be ignored by the house in certain circumstances stems from 19 th century house precedent . as noted in footnote 1 supra , at - large delegations were seated after they were prohibited in 1842 . moreover , a challenged delegation could argue that refusing to seat them would deprive an entire state of representation in the house . thus , one would expect that the 19 th century precedent would be followed today , although such precedent might be less compelling if the organization of the house were at stake . one could also argue that the contingencies set forth in 2 u.s.c . ยง 2a ( c ) still serve as a useful insurance policy to provide representation for a state that cannot , following the release of census numbers , complete the post - census redistricting process in time for the first congressional election .