the "sign of god" ) . shiite religious practice centers around the remembrance of ali's younger son , hussein , who was martyred near the town of karbala in iraq by sunni forces in 680 . his death is commemorated each year on the 10 th day of the islamic month of muharram in a somber and sometimes violent ritualistic remembrance known as "ashura," marked among some shiites by the ritual of self - flagellation . as a minority that was often persecuted by sunnis , shiites found solace in the ashura ritual , the telling of the martyrdom of hussein and the moral lessons to be learned from it , which reinforced shiite religious traditions and practices . twelver shiism — the most common form of shiism today — is pervasive in iran , iraq , lebanon , and bahrain . imams served as both spiritual and political leaders . but as shiites increasingly lost their political battles with sunni muslim rulers , imams focused on developing a spirituality that would serve as the core of shiite religious practices and beliefs . shiites believe that when the line of imams descended from ali ended , religious leaders , known as mujtahid s , gained the right to interpret religious , mystical , and legal knowledge to the broader community . the most learned among these teachers are known as ayatollah s ( lit . following the 12 th imam's disappearance , as one scholar notes , a "pacifist" trend emerged among twelvers who "chose to withdraw from politics and quietly await his coming. in the 20 th century , changes in the political landscape of the middle east led to a new competing "activist" trend among twelver groups in iran and lebanon , typified by the late iranian religious leader ayatollah khomeini . although most shiites agree on the basic premise that ali was the first rightful imam , they disagree on his successors . the ismailis , who are the second - largest shiite sect , broke off in the eighth century , recognizing only the first seven imams ( the seventh was named ismail , hence the names "ismaili" and "sevener" ) . historically and at least until the 16 th century , the ismailis were far more disposed than the twelvers to pursuing military and territorial power . in the past , they established powerful ruling states , which played significant roles in the development of islamic history . others respected and accepted the legitimacy of his caliphate but opposed political succession based on bloodline to the prophet . this group , who constituted the majority of muslims , came to be known in time as "sunni," meaning "followers of [the prophet's] customs [ sunna ]. the caliphate declined as a religious and political institution after the 13 th century , although the term "caliph" continued to be used by some muslim leaders until it was abolished in 1924 by turkey's first president mustafa kemal ataturk . the decline and abolition of the caliphate became a powerful religious and political symbol to some sunni islamist activists during the 19 th and 20 th centuries . these activists argued that leaders in the islamic world had undermined the caliphate by abandoning the "true path" of islam .