taxation . the oecd has worked with the g - 20 to combat tax evasion through a peer review process that includes over 100 countries and a joint oecd / council of europe convention on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters , which provides for automatic exchange of tax information . anticorruption . the oecd has engaged in the g - 20 anticorruption working group in the areas of foreign bribery , whistleblower protection , public sector integrity , and enhanced dialogue with business . reinvesting in agriculture , combating price volatility , and promoting food security . the oecd coordinated with the food and agriculture organization of the united nations ( fao ) in preparing the policy report on "price volatility in food and agricultural markets policy responses," which provided the basis for the g - 20 agriculture ministers to develop their action plan . the oecd is involved in the follow - up and assigned staff to the agricultural market information system initiative . the oecd , with its partner organizations , is making specific recommendations to g - 20 members in the area of agricultural productivity and the environment conducive to promoting private investment in agriculture . phasing out fossil fuel subsidies . the oecd is supporting countries in implementing their commitments to the g - 20 fossil fuel subsidy initiative and released in october 2011 the first - ever inventory of estimated budgetary support and tax expenditures for fossil fuels . the oecd is one of the four international organizations that contributed to the joint report to leaders at the june 2010 summit in toronto and the november 2010 summit in seoul and coordinated the international organization report for the november 2011 summit in cannes . implementing the seoul consensus on development . the oecd worked closely on six of the nine pillars of the multiyear action plan — domestic resource mobilization ; human resource development ; food security ; trade ; investment and job creation ; and knowledge sharing — and is actively contributing to their implementation . the oecd also provided relevant inputs to the other pillars — infrastructure ; growth with resilience / social protection ; and financial inclusion — to the g - 20 countries and international organizations that are leading their implementation . global value chains . at the g - 20 st. petersburg summit in june 2013 , the oecd , in combination with the world trade organization ( wto ) and the united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) , delivered a report on the contribution global value chains can make to sustainable growth in advanced and developing countries . long - term investment financing . the oecd delivered a report to the g - 20 on a framework for encouraging institutional investment in long - term assets , such as infrastructure and renewable energy projects , to strengthen the global economy . in addition , in december 2013 , the oecd published its bi - annual report on regional economies , which provides a comparative analysis of the economic performance of different geographic regions and efforts to revive economic growth following the 2008-2009 financial crisis .