islam has been undergoing a revival in asia . rand analyst angel rabasa points to several factors that contribute to this islamic resurgence in asia . these include both domestic and external factors . internally , the forces of globalization and the impact of western culture have played a role , especially the effect of rapid industrialization and resulting urbanization . the moro islamic liberation front ( milf ) , and abu sayyaf are examples of groups in the philippines where islamist ideology , secessionism , criminality , and linkages to international terrorist networks are evident . the terrorist jemaah islamiya ( ji ) organization , which seeks to establish an islamic khalifate across much of southeast asia and establish islamic law , has ties to al qaeda . in indonesia , the now reportedly disbanded lashkar jihad incited inter - communal strife between muslims and christians in sulawezi and the moluccas that created a struggle that can be exploited by terrorist groups such as ji . external factors include the current situation in iraq and afghanistan , the arab - israeli conflict , the 1979 islamic revolution in iran , the export of saudi - backed wahhabi islamic fundamentalism , the conflict between india and pakistan over kashmir , and the afghan war against the soviets . the majority of muslims are of the sunni tradition , while 10-15% are shiite . this difference stems from disagreement over the succession to the prophet mohammad . in south and southeast asia , shiites are a significant portion of the population in only afghanistan and pakistan . the puritanical sunni sect of wahhabism has played an important role in the resurgence of islam in asia . it stems from a 18 th century movement founded by muhammad ibn abd al - wahhab that preached a literal interpretation of the quran and an orthodox practice of islam . historically there has been a close relationship between wahhabism and the saudi dynasty . sufism is another more "mystical" variant of islam , though its presence in asia is small except for parts of south asia . the decline of islamic power in the wake of european colonial expansion provoked two key schools of thought within islam that continue to have relevance today . the traditionalist school believed that the cause for the decline of islam could be traced to "moral laxity and departure from the true path of islam. as a result , their response was to call for an islamic revival . others , known as reformers , felt that the decline was due to "a chronic failure to modernize their societies and institutions. the path of the reformers presents the question of whether it is possible to modernize without westernizing . at its core this is a struggle over values: "... how to protect a society's cultural heritage and traditional practices in an age of globalization and how to develop a creative coexistence between modernization and traditionalism without westernization. it is thought by some analysts that if the united states and the west seek to make common cause with moderate elements within the islamic world against violent extremists they would be well advised to do so in a way that is not perceived to be a threat to the islamic world .