epact ( p.l . 109-58 , ยง 1522 ) specified that epa must allot at least 80% of the lust trust fund appropriation to the states . under cooperative agreements with epa , the states receive grants to help cover the cost of administering the lust program . states have used most of their lust program grants to hire staff for technical oversight of corrective actions performed by responsible parties . s. 1666 would authorize the epa administrator to allow the introduction of mid - level ethanol blends into commerce only after the agency met several conditions , including responding to science advisory board recommendations on mitigating materials compatibility and consumer safety issues associated with the use of those higher blends . proponents argued that a safe harbor was merited because mtbe was used heavily to meet federal clean air mandates . they further argued that the focus should be placed on preventing leaks from usts , which have been the main source of mtbe contamination . ultimately , the conferees dropped the safe harbor provision and dropped a provision to ban mtbe . typically , they have used about one - third of their lust grants for cleaning up abandoned tank sites and undertaking emergency responses . in fy2009 , epa provided approximately $63 million through state cooperative agreements and to tribes for the cleanup program and used roughly $11 million to meet its responsibilities . epa provided another $34.4 million from the trust fund for state and tribal grants to implement and enforce the ust leak prevention program . the ustca amended rcra subtitle i to add new leak prevention and enforcement provisions to the ust regulatory program and imposed new requirements on states , epa , and tank owners . the ustca requires epa , and states that receive funding under subtitle i , to conduct compliance inspections of tanks at least once every three years . it also requires states to comply with epa guidance prohibiting fuel delivery to ineligible tanks , to develop training requirements for ust operators and individuals responsible for tank maintenance and spill response , and to prepare compliance reports on government - owned tanks in the state . further , to protect groundwater , states must require either that new tanks located near drinking water wells are equipped with secondary containment , or that ust manufacturers and installers maintain evidence of financial responsibility to provide for the costs of corrective actions . the ustca authorized the appropriation of $155 million annually for fy2006 through fy2011 from the lust trust fund for states to use to implement new and existing ust leak prevention requirements and to administer state programs . for cleanup purposes , the ustca authorized trust fund appropriations of $200 million annually for fy2006 through fy2011 for epa and states to administer the lust cleanup program , and another $200 million annually for fy2006 through fy2011 , specifically for addressing mtbe and other oxygenated fuels leaks ( such as ethanol ) . to increase state program resources and facilitate cleanups , congress provided the new funding authorities under epact ( including the authority to use the lust trust fund for prevention activities in addition to cleanup activities ) . nonetheless , trust fund requests remained at roughly $72 million .