the debate has continued since the last reauthorization of the hea . campus crimes , including the sale and use of illegal drugs , were among the topics discussed during the debates over the 1998 hea amendments . during the discussion , studies were introduced that illustrated that , although campus crime rates in general were decreasing , the number of drug - related incidents on campuses was increasing . in various reauthorization hearings and in committee reports , congress expressed concern about the increasing number of drug and alcohol - related incidents occurring on college campuses . during the reauthorization discussions , representative souder stated that the country was facing an epidemic of drug abuse , and proposed the provision on student eligibility as an "important first step" in dealing with this epidemic . congress ultimately added the provision to eliminate student eligibility for financial assistance for those who were convicted of drug - related crimes , as a part of p.l . it is estimated that more than 180,000 students have been denied federal financial aid or had the receipt of federal aid delayed since the adoption of this provision . according to data released by the organization students for sensible drug policy , this has represented fewer than .25% of all federal financial aid applicants since the provision was enacted . however , at least two states , california and texas , have had a large number of students who have been declared ineligible as a result of this provision ( see table 1 ) . largely in response to the confusion and contention surrounding the provision , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ) ( p.l . 109-171 ) was enacted to change the manner in which the provision was being implemented . the amended provision specifies that only those convictions for the sale or possession of a controlled substance that occur while the student is enrolled in postsecondary education and receiving title iv student aid would disqualify a student from receiving federal student aid . the dra did not change the provisions pertaining to the period of ineligibility due to a conviction for the sale or possession of a controlled substance . the higher education amendments ( hea ) of 1998 ( p.l . 105-244 ) added a provision , section 484 ( r ) , to the higher education act of 1965 to suspend eligibility for federal student aid ( grants , loans or work assistance under title iv of the hea ) to students who were convicted for the sale or possession of a controlled substance . although the provision was not scheduled to go into effect until two years after the reauthorization , debate regarding the implementation of the provision immediately ensued . many policymakers questioned the appropriateness of denying financial assistance to individuals who had already been convicted of a crime and paid their debt to society . other policymakers questioned the department of education's ( ed ) interpretation of the bill's language and their subsequent implementation of the policy . it remains that the period of ineligibility depends upon whether the conviction was for the sale or possession of a controlled substance , the recency of the conviction , and the number of prior convictions .