it did this in twoways . first , by creating new budget categories , and second , by setting statutory limitations on obligations . the actamended the balanced budget andemergency deficit control act of 1985 to create two new budget categories: highways and mass transit . the actfurther amended the budget process bycreating a statutory level for the limitation on obligations in each fiscal year from fy1999 to fy2003 . ( 3 ) finally , tea - 21 provided a mechanism , raba , toadjust the amounts available in the highway account to correspond with increased or decreased receipts in trust funddedicated tax revenues . the transit accountwas not included in the raba process . budget of theunited states fy2003 , analytical perspectives . february 2002. p. 241 . ( back ) rothman , heather and ferguson , brett . governors ask congress , president to spend down highway trust fund . daily report for executives . february 26,2002. p. a - 23 . ( back ) the unexpended balance is sometimes andinappropriately referred to as "the surplus" . the net effect of the creation of these budget categories is a predetermined level of funding for core highway programs , which is referred to in tea - 21 as adiscretionary spending guarantee or the guaranteed level . these categories are separated from the rest of thediscretionary budget in a way that prevents the useof funds assigned to these categories for any other purpose . these so called "firewalls" are viewed , in the tea - 21context , as guaranteed and / or minimumlevels of funding for highway and transit programs . additional funds above the firewall level can be made availablethrough the annual appropriations process . the raba process provides a link between the trust fund dedicated tax revenues that flow into the highway account and highway spending . this relationshiphas long been sought by advocates of increased highway spending who have contended that highway user feesshould be available only for highway programs . there were several options for dealing with the raba situation available to congress . the first of these , andthe one tacitly supported by the bushadministration initially , was to maintain the status quo . from this perspective the downward raba adjustmentis what congress agreed to allow when itpassed tea21 in 1998 . raba , in this view , had provided significantly more benefit than expected over time , anda down year should be expected fromtime - to - time . the budget assumptions contained in the president's fy2003 budget submission were predicated onthe downward raba adjustment . additional spending for highways could have the effect of raising the overall deficit figure in the president's budget,notwithstanding the separate budgetcategory for the highway trust fund and a significant unobligated balance in the trust fund . an option pursued by some legislators in the 2nd session of the 107th congress was legislation that restored fy2003 funding to the guaranteed level contained intea - 21 . 3694 and s. 1917 , the "highway funding restoration act," were simultaneouslyintroduced on february 7 , 2002 . these bills were identical . the bills directed that the limitation on obligations for fy2003 be raised to theguaranteed level .