regulation fd addresses selective disclosure . it provides that , when an issuer or any person acting on behalf of an issuer discloses material nonpublic information to certain enumerated persons ( typically , securities market professionals and holders of the securities ) , that issuer or person acting on behalf of the issuer must disclose the information to the public . this disclosure must be made simultaneously with the intentional disclosure to the enumerated persons or as promptly as possible after the disclosure , in the case of a non - intentional disclosure to the enumerated persons . there are numerous cases and administrative proceedings in which section 10 ( b ) and rule 10b - 5 have been used to prosecute insider trading violations . the following is a brief discussion of some of the most notable of these cases and proceedings . this new subsection would have held a person liable for violating the insider trading prohibition laid out in section 2 ( a ) of the bill if the person intentionally disclosed "without a legitimate business purpose" information he knew or should have known is material information and inside information . the bill would have defined "should know" to include various factors , such as the person's financial sophistication , knowledge of and experience in financial matters , position in the company , and assets under management . 1625 , 114 th congress , also referred to the house committee on financial services , would have added a new section 16a to the securities exchange act . this section would have prohibited the trading of securities if a person had material nonpublic information about the securities or knew or recklessly disregarded that the information was wrongfully obtained or that the securities transaction would involve a wrongful use of the information . the section would also have prohibited a person from communicating material nonpublic information about securities to others if: ( 1 ) others engaged in securities transactions based on the communication and ( 2 ) the securities transactions were reasonably foreseeable . the standard for the wrongfulness of a communication is based on information that has been obtained by activities such as theft , breach of a fiduciary duty , or violation of a federal law protecting computer data . specific knowledge of how the information was obtained is not necessary for a violation so long as the person trading was aware or recklessly disregarded that the information was wrongfully obtained or communicated . the bill would also have authorized the sec to provide exemptions from these prohibitions by rule if the exemptions were not inconsistent with the purposes of the section . s. 702 , 114 th congress , referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , would have added a new subsection ( d ) to section 10 of the securities exchange act . this new subsection would have prohibited securities transactions on the basis of material information that a person knew or had reason to know was not publicly available . it also would have prohibited knowingly or recklessly communicating information that was not publicly available if it was reasonably foreseeable that the communication was likely to result in a securities transaction .