house h.res . 120 urged the president to take "all appropriate action" to secure the release and safe exit from iraq of american citizens william barloon and david daliberti , who had mistakenlycrossed iraq's border and were detained . public laws p.l . authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution . gave congressional authorization to expel iraq from kuwait in accordance with united nationssecurity council resolution 678 , which called for the implementation of eleven previous security councilresolutions . became public law: january 12 , 1991 p.l . the foreign relations authorization act for fy1992 ( section 301 ) . stated that the president should propose to the security council that members of the iraqiregime be put on trial for war crimes . became public law: october 28 , 1991 p.l . defense authorization act for fy1992 ( section 1095 ) . supported the use of "all necessary means to achieve the goals of united nations security councilresolution 687 as being consistent with the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution ( p.l.102-1 ) . became public law: december 5 , 199 . public laws p.l . defense authorization act fy1994 ( section 1164 ) . denied defectors of the iraqi military entry into the united states unless those persons had assisted u.s. orcoalition forces and had not committed any war crimes . 104 expresses the unequivocal support and appreciation of the nation ( 1 ) to the president as commander - in - chief for his firm leadership and decisive action in the conduct ofmilitary operations in iraq as part of the on - going global war on terrorism ; ( 2 ) to the members of the u.s. armedforces serving in operation iraqi freedom , who are carrying out their missions withexcellence , patriotism , and bravery ; and ( 3 ) to the families of the u.s. military personnel serving in operation iraqifreedom , who are providing support and prayers for their loved ones currently engagedin military operations in iraq . became public law: november 30 , 1993 p.l . foreign relations authorization act fy1994 , 1995 ( section 507 ) . authorized the president to use armed force to defend the national security of the united statesagainst the threat posed by iraq and to enforce all relevant u.n. resolutions regarding iraq . became public law:october 16 , 200 . became public law:august 14 , 1998 p.l . iraq liberation act of 1988 ( section 586 ) . declared that it should be the policy of the united states to "support efforts" to remove saddam hussein from power iniraq and replace him with a democratic government . 95 commends and supports the efforts and leadership of the president , as commander in chief , in the conflict against iraq . commends , and expresses the gratitude of the nation to allmembers of the u.s. armed forces ( whether on active duty , in the national guard , or in the reserves ) and thecivilian employees who support their efforts , as well as the men and women of civiliannational security agencies who are participating in the military operations in the persian gulf region , for theirprofessional excellence , dedicated patriotism , and exemplary bravery .