the results are then extrapolated . the research concluded that the combined number of adults with either an hsa or an hra was 4.8 million in 2009 , 5.4 million in 2010 , 8.5 million in 2011 , and 11.6 million in 2012 . a substantial majority of these individuals are likely to be hsa holders . ( more details are given below. ) this report describes current law surrounding these accounts and provides a side - by - side comparison of their key features . the report also provides an indication of the relative prevalence of the accounts . there are two broad categories of tax provisions that can lower an individual's tax liability because of qualifying medical expenses . first , qualifying medical expenses can be a tax deduction . tax filers can itemize medical expenses incurred by him - or herself , spouse , and dependents if these expenses are over the legislative minimum . second , tax filers can use one ( or occasionally more ) of the tax - advantaged accounts discussed in this report . unlike with fsas , those who hold hsas must have hdhps . one measure of hsa accessibility is therefore possession of an hdhp that qualifies for an hsa . according to a survey of private employers conducted by the kaiser family foundation and the health research & educational trust ( kff / hret ) in 2012 , 26% of firms offering health benefits offered an hsa - qualified hdhp . this percent was 12% in 2010 and 18% in 2011 . workers in larger firms were more likely to have access to an hdhp than those in smaller firms . although the accounts differ in many ways , each account contains contributed income that the account holder uses to pay for qualifying medical expenses . each account provides tax savings to the account holder because the money contributed to the account is not considered a part of the individual's adjusted gross income . therefore , no taxes are paid on this income , and for those arrangements where the income is placed in an account , no taxes are paid on interest earned on the income in the account . the survey measures the number of adults with either an hsa or an hra . moreover , the tax filer does not need to itemize deductions to receive tax savings from the account . itemized deductions cannot be funded through a tax - advantaged account , and expenses funded through an account cannot be declared as itemized deductions . in other words , "double counting" is prohibited . in general , qualifying medical expenses are defined in the internal revenue code ( irc ) at section 213 ( d ) and typically include deductibles , copayments , and goods and / or services not covered by insurance . the goods and / or services can include medical services rendered by physicians , surgeons , dentists , and other medical practitioners . the costs of equipment , supplies , devices , and prescription drugs are also qualifying expenses . to qualify , the medical care must be primarily used to alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect or illness .