it cannot be exercised elsewhere . the issue arises most often in the context of the extent of discretion which a court assigns a probation officer . in crafting the conditions for a particular defendant , a sentencing court will often delegate initial implementing responsibilities to a probation officer . the line between permissible and impermissible delegation is not always clear . in some cases , it is a question of whether the task assigned a probation officer in a condition of supervised release touches upon a defendant's significant liberty interest . in others , it is a matter of whether the court has declared that a particular condition is to be imposed , even though thereafter the court may have delegated considerable implementing discretion . yet elsewhere , the issue turns on the level of court oversight of the probation officer when implementing a condition . the sex offender conditions have generated a number of first amendment challenges , primarily in two areas: overbreadth and freedom of association . under the first amendment overbreadth doctrine , a condition is overbroad if it sweeps in a substantial amount of constitutionally protected speech along with legitimately targeted unprotected speech . the courts also recognize a right to intimate or familial relationships as a component of the freedom of association which extends to "personal decisions about marriage , childbirth , raising children , cohabiting with relatives and the like. defendants have often contended that a particular condition to which they are subject is overbroad , or improperly intrudes upon their freedom of association . both doctrines have companions in due process , discussed below . both challenges are often resolved by recourse to section 3583 ( d ) 's "reasonably related" and "no unnecessary deprivation of liberty" requirements , which can provide the narrow tailoring that the first amendment demands . in fact , cases that have first amendment implications are often resolved on those statutory grounds . the fourth amendment guarantees a right "against unreasonable searches and seizures. following an individual's criminal conviction , however , the supreme court has used a "general balancing" test , in which it assesses "on the one hand , the degree to which [the government action] intrudes upon an individual's privacy and , on the other , the degree to which it is needed for the promotion of legitimate interests. because people on supervised release , like others along the "continuum of punishment," have a "reduced expectation of privacy" under the court's fourth amendment jurisprudence , their privacy interests carry less weight in this balancing test . section 3583 ( d ) and the corresponding sentencing guideline authorize warrantless , suspicionless search conditions in the case of offenders required to register as sex offenders . elsewhere , it has been said a search condition must satisfy the "reasonably related" standards . yet the courts are divided over the question of whether probation officers may conduct a warrantless search in the absence of a specific condition .