similar legislation has not advanced in the 108th congress . see also crs report rl31507 , employer stock in retirement plans: investment risk and retirement security , by [author name scrubbed] ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ; and crs report rl31551 , employer stock in pension plans: economic and tax issues , by jane gravelle . in the wake of enron and other scandals , corporate boards of directors were subject to critical scrutiny . boards , whose chief duty is to represent shareholders'interests , utterly failed to prevent or detect management fraud . in the 108th congress , the senate twice rejected legislation ( s.amdt . one part of the fallout from enron's demise involves its relations with banks . prominent banking companies , notably citigroup and j.p. morgan chase , wereinvolved in both the investment banking ( securities ) and the commercial banking ( lending and deposit ) businesseswith enron . in 2003 , the sec fined the twobanks $120 and $135 million , respectively , for their roles in enron's accounting frauds . several aspects of enron's relations with its bankers have raised several questions . ( 1 ) do financial holding companies ( firms that encompass both investmentand commercial banking operations ) face a conflict of interest , between their duty to avoid excessive risk on loansfrom their bank sides versus their opportunityto glean profits from deals on their investment banking side ? ( 2 ) were the bankers enticed or pressured to providefunding for enron and recommend itssecurities and derivatives to other parties ? ( 3 ) did the dynegy rescue plan , proposed just before enron's collapse,and involving further investments by j.p.morgan chase and citigroup , represent protective self - dealing ? ( 4 ) what is the proper accounting for banks'off - balance - sheet items including derivativepositions and lines of credit , such as they provided to enron ? ( 5 ) did the enron situation represent a warning thatglba may need fine - tuning in the way itmixes the different business practices of wall street and commercial banking ? see also crs report rs21188 , enron's banking relationships and congressional repeal of statutes separating bank lending from investment banking , by[author name scrubbed] . part of enron's core energy business involved dealing in derivative contracts based on the prices of oil , gas , electricity and other variables . for example , enronsold long - term contracts to buy or sell energy at fixed prices . these contracts allow the buyers to avoid , or hedge,the risks that increases ( or drops ) in energyprices posed to their businesses . since the markets in which enron traded are largely unregulated , with no reportingrequirements , little information is availableabout the extent or profitability of enron's derivatives activities , beyond what is contained in the company's ownfinancial statements . while trading inderivatives is an extremely high - risk activity , no evidence has yet emerged that indicates that speculative losses werea factor in enron's collapse . since the enron failure , several energy derivatives dealers have admitted to making "wash trades," which lack economic substance but give the appearance ofgreater market volume than actually exists , and facilitate deceptive accounting ( if the fictitious trades are reportedas real revenue ) .