the eu had claimed that there were no measures imposing a moratorium . the panel agreed with the united states and the co - complainants that marketing or import prohibitions on ge products in six eu countries ( austria , france , germany , greece , italy , and luxembourg ) violated the wto's agreement on sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures , which requires such measures to be based on science and risk assessment . traceability provisions now require all firms that produce , store , move , or process ge products to track and keep records on them from farm to consumer . compliance with the eu labeling rule requires segregation of ge crops and foods derived from them from the time they are planted all the way through the processing and marketing chain . this entails prevention of pollen drift from ge to non - ge fields ; and difficult and costly handling procedures such as using separate equipment , storage , and shipping containers , or at least painstakingly cleaning them . u.s. interests argue that food companies forced to label accurately all ge products face huge risks and liabilities . all of these problems discriminate against u.s. shipments — even though they are as safe as "conventional" shipments , they contend . in practice , many u.s. manufacturers have opted not to market ge products in the eu , in part due to the eu's stricter ge regulations . the european commission is currently discussing new technical guidelines for the allowable level of genetically engineered organisms in food and feed shipments for ge products that have been approved in exporting countries but not the eu . differing u.s. and eu perspectives may reflect the fact that u.s. consumers apparently have been not only less fearful of ge foods than their european counterparts , but also more confident in their food safety regulators . according to usda's economic research service ( ers ) , surveys of consumer attitudes toward ge products , conducted both here and overseas , have yielded mixed results . still , "u.s. consumers have voiced little objection to genetically modified foods , while eu consumers have been vocal in their disapproval," ers observed . europeans may be much more wary of changes in how their food is produced due to a series of recent food safety crises during the 1990s . the united states has embraced the concept of substantial equivalence with regard to ge products: if a ge product is substantially the same as its conventional counterpart , it should be regulated no differently than the conventional product . the eu , on the other hand , takes a "precautionary approach," which means that if scientific evidence is insufficient or inconclusive regarding a practice's or product's potential dangers to human or environmental health , it should be more vigorously regulated or even prohibited if there are reasonable grounds for concern , thus providing a safeguard against future unforeseen problems . under this approach , the products of biotechnology are deemed to be inherently different from their conventional counterparts and to require a separate regulatory regime .