this authority expired in 1994 . congressional consideration of the relationship between trade and environment has continued to grow . efforts to renew tpa in the 104 th , 105 th and 106 th congresses failed in large part because of disagreement over the inclusion of environmental and labor issues . the 107 th congress gave unprecedented consideration to these issues , as the successful passage of tpa legislation became dependent in part on the treatment of environmental and labor issues . ( for more information , see crs issue brief 10084 , trade promotion authority ( fast - track authority for trade agreements ) : background and developments in the 107 th congress. ) the trade act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-210 , title xxi ) renews the president's trade promotion authority . the act covers trade agreements reached by june 1 , 2005 , with a two - year extension possible . the law lists overall and principal objectives in trade negotiations and priorities the president must promote to maintain u.s. competitiveness . under provisions of the act , agreements would have to make progress in meeting the negotiating objectives , and the president would have to satisfy the consultation and assessment requirements . the trade act also establishes a new congressional advisory body on trade negotiations called the congressional oversight group . the 2002 trade act contains several environmental objectives and related provisions , and , overall , gives substantially greater consideration to environmental matters than did the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 , under which fast - track procedures were last approved . the environment - related negotiating objectives and priorities included in the new law are discussed below . the law includes two overall negotiating objectives on environment . the first objective is "to ensure that trade and environmental policies are mutually supportive and to seek to protect and preserve the environment and enhance the international means of doing so , while optimizing the use of the world's resources. the second overall negotiating objective is to seek provisions in agreements under which parties "strive to ensure that they do not weaken or reduce the protections afforded in domestic environmental and labor laws as an encouragement for trade" ( sections 2102 ( a ) ( 5 ) and ( 7 ) ) . this objective parallels language in the u.s. - jordan free trade agreement ( fta ) and nafta ( chapter 11 , investment ) . both of these trade agreements assert that it is inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domestic environmental laws and generally state that a party should not waive or otherwise derogate from such measures to attract investment . nafta , article 1114 , further provides that a party may request consultations if it considers that another party has done so . environmental advocates had argued for such a trade negotiating objective to deter countries from weakening their environmental standards to promote a trade advantage . they further called for making such actions subject to dispute settlement procedures . those who opposed this proposal expressed concern that , if this approach were taken , legitimate changes in domestic environmental measures could be subject to challenge by u.s. trading partners .