organization . the constitutive act of the african union defines the institutionalstructure , organizational principles , and broad policy roles of constituent au organs . these include the following: an assembly , an executive council , and a commission of the union . a pan - african parliament and a permanent representatives committee . court of justice . peace and security council . ( 5 ) specialized technical committees , responsible to the executive council . these include committeeson:economy and agricultural matters ; monetary and financial affairs ; trade , customs and immigration matters ; industry , science andtechnology , energy , natural resources and environment ; transport , communications and tourism ; health , laborand socialaffairs ; and education , culture and human resources . economic , social and cultural council . central financial institutions ( including an african central bank ; and african monetary fund ; andan africaninvestment bank ) . the precise operational relationships among these organs and with their subsidiary bodies , and their structures , functions , mandates,and powers , are yet to be determined . african union policy: nepad . a key au policy vehicle is the new partnershipfor africa's development ( nepad ) , a multi - sector sustainable development and investment planning and advocacyframework . ithas been endorsed by diverse african leaders and by key multilateral organizations . ( 6 ) a core feature of nepad is the voluntary,progress - based african peer review mechanism ( aprm ) . aprm signatory states will be subject to peerevaluations that will assesstheir degree of adherence to political , economic and corporate governance goals , codes , and standards containedin the nepad declaration on democracy , political , economic and corporate governance . during the african union inaugural summit in july 2002 , leaders from across africa joined together in a public display ofcontinental unity and pageantry . the formation of the african union , however , was reportedly the subject ofsignificant , sometimesdivisive debate among african leaders . the debate arrayed leading political and economic reformers , in particularadvocates ofnepad and of africa's further integration into the global economy , against several leaders who have championedafrican politicalautonomy and nationalist policy agendas . the latter , including the heads of state of libya , zimbabwe , namibia andgambia,criticized nepad . they warned that for such a plan to be successful , it would need to be defined , realized , andcontrolled byafricans alone , independent of external influences . nepad was defined by foreign political and economic models,they asserted,and might subject africa to externally - imposed political conditions in exchange for credit and other assistance . theyalso assertedthat nepad would create financial dependency on external creditors . ( 7 ) libyan and south african leadership roles . differences over the proposedpurpose and role of the au played out in reported disagreements between president thabo mbeki of south africaand libyan leadermuammar al - qadhafi . the latter has promoted a range of populist , sometimes radical , proposals . these reflecttraditionalpan - africanist goals emphasizing a need for greater continental unity and sovereignty vis - a - vis the industrializedworld , and a strongrejection of policy conditionalities in exchange for access to credit .