he confessed and was sentenced in 2012 . two other ethnic uzbeks were arrested in the united states in early 2012 on charges of collaborating with the iju . one of the uzbeks had been granted refugee status after he fled the uzbek government crackdown in andijon in 2005 . the imu and iju claimed responsibility . on may 25-26 , 2009 , a police checkpoint was attacked on the kyrgyz - uzbek border , attacks took place in the border town of khanabad , and four bombings occurred in andijon in the commercial district , including at least one by suicide bombers . several deaths and injuries were alleged , although reporting was suppressed . uzbek officials blamed the imu , although the iju allegedly claimed responsibility . president karimov flew to andijon on may 31 . in late august 2009 , shootings took place in tashkent that resulted in the deaths of three alleged imu members and the apprehension of other group members . the uzbek government alleged that the group had been involved in the 1999 explosions and in recent assassinations in tashkent . in september 2000 , the state department designated the imu as a foreign terrorist organization , stating that the imu , aided by afghanistan's taliban and by osama bin laden , resorts to terrorism , actively threatens u.s. interests , and attacks american citizens . the "main goal of the imu is to topple the current government in uzbekistan," the state department warned , and it linked the imu to bombings and attacks on uzbekistan in 1999-2000 . imu forces assisting the taliban and al qaeda suffered major losses during coalition actions in afghanistan , and imu co - head namanganiy was probably killed . former cia director porter goss testified in march 2005 that the ijg / iju "has become a more virulent threat to u.s. interests and local governments. in may 2005 , the state department designated the ijg / iju as a foreign terrorist organization and specially designated global terrorist , and in june , the u.n. security council added the ijg / iju to its terrorism list . in june 2008 , ijg head jalolov and his associate suhayl fatilloevich buranov were added to the u.n. 1267 sanctions committee's consolidated list of individuals and entities associated with bin laden , al qaeda , and the taliban . also , the u.s. treasury department ordered that any of their assets under u.s. jurisdiction be frozen and prohibited u.s. citizens from financial dealings with the terrorists . imu head yuldashev reportedly was killed in late august 2009 in pakistan by a u.s. predator drone missile , and jalalov allegedly similarly was killed in late september 2009 . yuldashev's deputy , abu usmon odil , became the head of the imu . in july 2011 , an uzbek citizen on an expired student visa was arrested on charges of being directed by imu terrorists to assassinate president obama . he was arrested at a u.s. airport while allegedly planning to join iju terrorists abroad . in may 2013 , an ethnic uzbek was arrested in idaho on charges of providing money and computer support to the imu for an unspecified attack .