ambassador to kuwait . like other gulf states , kuwait sees peaceful uses of nuclear energy as important to its economy , although doing so always raises fears among some in the united states , israel , and elsewhere about the ultimate intentions of developing a nuclear program . in 2012 , kuwait formally abandoned plans announced in 2011 to build up to four nuclear power reactors . the government delegated any continuing nuclear power research to its kuwait institute for scientific research ( kisr ) . kuwait is cooperating with the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) to ensure international oversight of any nuclear work in kuwait . in fy2015 , the united states provided about $38,000 to help train kuwaiti personnel in nuclear security issues , and about $58,000 was provided in fy2016 for this purpose . in 1994 , kuwait became a founding member of the world trade organization ( wto ) . in february 2004 , the united states and kuwait signed a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) , often viewed as a prelude to a free trade agreement ( fta ) , which kuwait has said it seeks . in the course of the september 8 , 2017 , u.s. - kuwait strategic dialogue , the u.s. department of commerce finalized a memorandum of understanding with kuwait's direct investment promotion authority to encourage additional investments in both countries . kuwait gave $500 million worth of oil to u.s. states affected by hurricane katrina . the united states' imports of oil from kuwait have been declining as u.s. oil imports have declined generally . the united states imports about 100,000 barrels per day of crude oil from kuwait , as of mid - 2018 . total u.s. exports to kuwait were about $5.1 billion in 2017 , and total u.s. imports from kuwait in 2017 were about $3 billion . based on figures through november 2018 , u.s. exports to kuwait in 2018 were only about half of what they were the prior year , and imports from kuwait fell by about 25% in that time period . u.s. exports to kuwait consist mostly of automobiles , industrial equipment , and foodstuffs . lawrence robert silverman is u.s . after the united states , kuwait's most important alliances are with the other gcc states . kuwait has tended to act within a gcc consensus and to try to preserve gcc unity . political infighting and the drop in oil prices since 2014 have affected kuwait's economy , but the country is taking steps to try to reduce its economic vulnerability . hydrocarbons sales still represent about 90% of government export revenues and about 60% of its gross domestic product ( gdp ) . because kuwait requires that crude oil sell for about nearly $75 per barrel to balance its budget — well above prices for most of the time since 2014 — kuwait has run budget deficits of about $15 billion per year since 2015 . kuwait deferred capital infrastructure investment and reduced public sector salaries and subsidies , according to the imf and other observers .