a final issue pertains to schedule . mda hopes to field a prototype by 2006 have already slipped to 2010 , confirming the belief of many that this program's schedule is too aggressive . the life cycle costs for many unmanned lta concepts could be notably less than manned aircraft , and satellites , and potentially uavs . in february 2006 , the air force scientific advisory board also cast doubt on this schedule when it reported that long - endurance , fixed wing uavs offer more promise than lighter - than - air vehicles in conducting surveillance from near - space altitudes . the republic of korea initiated a haa program that spans 10 years of research and development . this budget pressure , coupled with competition from a well established constituency for conventional aircraft , represent challenges to fielding lta programs . the role that they appear most suited for is persistent surveillance . delivering a brigade - sized payload directly to a theater of conflict sounds attractive from a conventional wisdom point of view . also , while the united states is relatively unchallenged in air - to - air combat , a 1,000 ton airship with a brigade - worth of equipment could constitute a very "high value" target for enemy aircraft . it is likely that dod would find it prudent to protect these airships with fighters . how many fighters would be required and what would be the costs ? a final issue that pertains to all of the lta concepts addressed above is cost and budget . but can dod find room in its budget for another procurement program ? according to some , "a perennial issue in defense policy is whether future defense budgets will be large enough to finance all the weapon acquisition programs that are in the pipeline. but , large payloads take longer to consolidate , load , and unload than smaller payloads , and the their delivery must be tightly scheduled . also , dod operates on an all weather , day or night , 24 / 7 timetable . airships will be more vulnerable to the effects of weather than are conventional aircraft . how severe , or how manageable is this shortcoming ? how will an airship capable of lifting 1,000 tons of payload return to the united states once its cargo is offloaded ? would it require a very large ballast or a means of suppressing its buoyancy to be able to fly home ? vulnerability to attacks is another issue that may warrant study . airships would fly at an altitude within reach of many surface - to - air weapons . lta proponents say that airships have a small radar cross section and degrade gracefully if hit . this may be true for the balloon , but a brigade - worth of equipment would have a large radar cross section . aerostats' primary advantages over other platforms capable of providing elevated , persistent surveillance ( manned aircraft and uavs ) appear to be low life cycle cost and long dwell time . because hybrid airships use aerodynamic lift , however , they will take - off and land much like conventional aircraft .