calls for further change . not only is there discussion about what changes should be made in congressionalstructures , but there is also discussion about when such changes should be made . with the 9 / 11 commission'srecent recommendations and the september 30,2004 , deadline for committee system reform proposals from the house homeland security committee , some sayreforms are so vital that they should beadopted before congress adjourns for the election . these advocates can point to the 1974 house committee reformswhich were passed just before the electionsthat year . other say it would be best to defer such action until the beginning of the new congress in january . if it were limited to conductingoversight , how and through what process wouldits findings be converted into legislative recommendations ? in view of the recommendations of the 9 / 11commission about the house and senate permanentselect committees on intelligence , will the views of the house and senate about creating such select committeeson other subjects change ? create a joint committee on homeland security . the house and senate could create a joint committee tooversee the work of the new department . however , only one joint committee in the last half - century has beengranted legislative jurisdiction . if such a jointpanel were created , the question of sequential referrals to existing standing committees could still be raised . thehouse and senate acted separately in the 107thcongress to permit the two intelligence committees to hold an inquiry into intelligence failures prior to the terroristattacks . nothing in house or senate ruleswould preclude existing house or senate committees from holding joint hearings in the interests of greaterefficiency . some view joint committees as a meansto permit more efficient congressional review of policy areas , while others believe that separate committees help preserve chamber autonomy and encourageindependent committee initiatives . these memoranda serve as guidance to theparliamentarians' offices in making bill referrals andmay obviate the immediate need for a formal revision in committee jurisdictions . the senate also makes use of "temporary standing orders," unanimous consent agreements typically in force for the current congress only , that modify thestanding rules of the senate . one or more temporary standing orders could be used to allocate jurisdiction amongsenate committees over homeland securityissues , subject to renewal or modification at the beginning of each succeeding congress . if successful , the temporaryorders could be converted into morepermanent changes in senate procedure ; if not , other realignments could be attempted . further realign appropriations committees' subcommittees . the house and senate appropriationscommittees adapted their structures in 2003 to create a new subcommittee on homeland security . ( 7 ) additional recommendations by the 9 / 11 commissioninclude a proposal to set out intelligence appropriations in a separate appropriations bill , or to combine authorizationand appropriations for intelligenceactivities in only one panel in each chamber . additional changes may be required in the appropriationscommittees' structures and the procedures throughwhich they draft both regular and supplemental appropriations bills . create leadership committee . after the election , the voters will have supplied freshmandates and the house and senate will have time in january before the inauguration to consider morecomprehensive reform options thoroughly .