if improvements are required or desired , they are administrative in nature . for example , the dod 10-year"look - back" may require refinement since the scope of the policy may actually be shorter than intended . it is also helpful to understand the difference between promotions and appointments . in general , military officers are selected forpromotion to one - or two - star rank by a centralized ad hoc selection board of general / flag officers . candidates forthree - andfour - star appointments are not considered by a centralized board , but instead nominated by a service secretarythrough the secretaryof defense . for reappointments to another three - or four - star position , the senate is required to reconfirm thepersonnel action , evenif no promotion is involved . according to title 10 , section 1370 of the united states code , gfo retirements mustalso beindividually confirmed by the senate . dod instruction 1320.4 identifies how adverse information is considered by board members during one - and two - star centralizedpromotion boards . section 615 , title 10 , u.s. code , armed forces , closely governs the procedures used by themilitary to consideradverse information during the promotion process by giving specific guidance on the type of information that maybe furnished toboard members . specifically , information about a particular officer may be furnished to a selection board only ifthe informationexists in official military records ( personnel folders , investigative records , etc. ) additionally , it must be determinedby a servicesecretary to be "substantiated , relevant information" that could "reasonably and materially affect the deliberations"of the selectionboard . the law also mandates that before adverse information about an officer is furnished to a board , theinformation must be madeavailable to the officer and that the officer must be given a reasonable opportunity to submit comments to the board . the dod instruction also directs that for all gfo promotions and appointments , the service secretary review all official dodinvestigation records to confirm that each candidate meets prescribed standards of conduct . this internal reviewis usually led by thegeneral counsel of the respective military department . records reviewed by each service include files from theinspector general,military criminal investigation units , and equal employment opportunity ( eeo ) organizations . for promotionsto one - star , aservice secretary directs a review of all adverse information covering the last 10 years of an officer's career toidentify negativetrends . for two - , three - and four - star personnel actions , the review includes any new adverseinformation since the individual's lastsenate confirmation . once the review is completed , the service secretary considers the adverse information , if any,and decides ifhe or she will support the nomination . if so , the secretary will forward a nomination package identifying theproposed promotion orappointment to the secretary of defense through the assistant secretary of defense / force management policy ( asd / fmp ) .