2201 ( c ) . ( 19 ) further actions by the president pursuant to his september 14 and 23 , 2001 , national emergency declarations , and the issuance ofadditional such declarations concerning terrorism , will be chronicled in this report as they occur . authorizes the president to make a determination that it isnecessary to increase the number of members of the armed services on active duty beyond the number for whichfunds have beenappropriated for the department of defense . ( 11 ) on september 23 , 2001 , president bush again declared a national emergency , invoked the international emergency economic powersact ( ieepa ) , ( 12 ) and ordered its implementationto block property and prohibit transactions with persons who commit , threaten tocommit , or support terrorism . the statute established an exclusive means for declaring a national emergency . authorizes the president , in time of national emergency declaredby the president , to call members of the ready reserve to active duty . authorizes the secretary of transportation , in time of war ornational emergency , to order any regular officer of the coast guard on the retired list to active duty . authorizes the commandant of the coast guard , in time of war ornational emergency , to order any enlisted member of the coast guard on the retired list to active duty . 13235invoking the emergency construction authority and making it available for implementation by the secretary ofdefense and , at thesecretary's discretion , to the secretaries of the military departments . ( 15 ) this authority , found at 10 u.s.c . 2808 , authorizes thesecretary of defense , in time of declared war or national emergency declared by the president , and without regardto any otherprovision of law , to undertake military construction projects and to authorize the secretaries of the militarydepartments to undertakesuch construction projects , not otherwise authorized by law , as are necessary to support use of the armed forces . authorizes the secretary of transportation to detain enlistedmembers of the coast guard beyond their terms of enlistment . president bush directed and delegated the exercise of this authority with e.o . 13223 of september 14 , 2001 . ( 13 ) the ieepaauthorizes the president to regulate or prohibit any transactions in foreign exchange,bank transfers of credit or payments involving any interest of any foreign country or a national thereof , ortransactions involving anyproperty in which any foreign country or a national thereof has any interest . earlier , president clinton had declareda nationalemergency and invoked the ieepa to prohibit transactions with terrorists who threatened to disrupt the middle eastpeace process . ( 6 ) the national emergencies act was amended in 1985 to substitute a jointresolution as the vehicle for rescinding a national emergency declaration . ( 7 ) when declaring a national emergency , the president must indicate , according to title iii , the powers and authorities being activated torespond to the exigency at hand . a recent crs compilation identifies almost 160 provisions of law that may beactivated by anemergency proclamation . ( 8 ) they include authorityto prosecute and punish anyone who willfully makes or conspires to makedefective war material ( 18 u.s.c .