that are prepared on a routine basis . the intelligencereform act does not transfer extensive analytical efforts to the nid ; leaving such duties to existing agencies ; thenic will be responsible forassessments that set forth the judgments of the intelligence community as a whole . nies are sometimes highly controversial . they are designed to set forth the best objective judgments of the intelligence community , but theyoccasionally are more closely related to policy rationales than some analysts would prefer . an nie produced inoctober 2002 on iraq's continuingprograms for weapons of mass destruction has been much criticized ; a more recent nie on prospects for iraq hasbeen the source of significantmedia attention . ( 10 ) although the importance of particular nies to specific policy decisions may be debatable , ( 11 ) the nie process provides a formal opportunity fortheintelligence community's input to policy deliberations . arguably , it is the responsibility of policymakers to seekthe input of the intelligencecommunity , but most observers would argue that the dni should not be reticent in presenting intelligenceinformation and judgments on majorpolicy issues when difficult decisions are under consideration . the most recent chairman of the nic is ambassador robert l. hutchings , who had previously served in the state department and in academicinstitutions . ( 12 ) in addition , there are senioranalysts , known as national intelligence officers ( nios ) , for africa , east asia , economics and globalissues , europe , intelligence assurance , latin america , military issues , near east and south asia , russia andeurasia , transnational threats,warning , and weapons of mass destruction and proliferation . the nios , who do not receive senate confirmation,come from a variety ofgovernment agencies , inside and outside the intelligence community , and from the private sector . national intelligence officers supervise the production of nies and other community - wide products . typically , an analyst in one agency isdesignated by the relevant nio to prepare a draft analytical product ; the draft then is reviewed by relevant analyststhroughout the community . subsequently , if approved by the leadership of the intelligence community ( the national foreign intelligence board ) and the dci , the draft has beencirculated to policymakers in the executive branch and , on occasion , to members of congress . nies set forth thebest information and judgments ofthe intelligence community and are usually directed at significant issues that may require policy decisions . the nios have worked for the dci in his capacity as head of the intelligence community rather than in his capacity as director of the cia . ( in thefuture they will report to the dni. ) thus , nies and related analytical products have not been cia products ; theyhave represented the consolidatedviews of the intelligence community ( with alternative views held by elements of the intelligence community noted,in accordance with the statutorymandate ( 13 ) ) . it may be reasonably assumed that the nic will continue to depend heavily on the resources of the cia . the cia contains the most extensiveanalytical capability across the board on all subjects that might concern national policymakers , as well asconsiderable capability to support militarycommanders and mid - level desk officers .