the two exchange rates differed significantly . the official exchange rate with the dollar in 1993 was 5.77 yuan versus 8.70 yuan in the swap markets . china's dual exchange rate system was criticized by the united states because of the restrictions it ( and other policies ) placed on foreign imports . in 1994 , the chinese government unified the two exchange rate systems at an initial rate of 8.70 yuan to the dollar , which eventually was allowed to rise to 8.28 by 1997 and was then kept relatively constant until july 2005 . the rmb became largely convertible on a current account ( trade ) basis , but not on a capital account basis , meaning that foreign exchange in china is not regularly obtainable for investment purposes . from 1994 until july 2005 , china maintained a policy of pegging the rmb to the u.s. dollar at an exchange rate of roughly 8.28 yuan to the dollar . the peg appears to have been largely intended to promote a relatively stable environment for foreign trade and investment in china ( since such a policy prevents large swings in exchange rates ) — a policy utilized by many developing countries in their early development stages . the chinese central bank maintained this peg by buying ( or selling ) as many dollar - denominated assets in exchange for newly printed yuan as needed to eliminate excess demand ( supply ) for the yuan . as a result , the exchange rate between the rmb and the dollar varied little , despite changing economic factors which could have otherwise caused the yuan to appreciate ( or depreciate ) relative to the dollar . under a floating exchange rate system , the relative demand for the two countries' goods and assets would determine the exchange rate of the rmb to the dollar . this section examines a number of issues pertaining to the effects of china's undervalued currency on the u.s. economy . the economic effects on the chinese economy of an undervalued currency are examined later in the report . chinese officials argue that their currency policy is not meant to favor exports over imports , but instead to foster economic stability through currency stability . the policy reflects the government's goals of using exports as a way of providing jobs to chinese workers and to attract fdi in order to gain access to technology and know - how . the chinese government has stated on a number of occasions that currency reform is a long - term goal which will be implemented gradually . officials have strongly condemned international pressure to induce china to appreciate the currency , arguing that it interferes with china's "sovereignty" to implement its own domestic economic policies . in 2009 , ( then ) chinese premier wen jiabao was reported by chinese media as complaining that "some countries demand the yuan's appreciation , while practicing various trade protectionism against china . reform of the financial sector , including the adoption of a market - determined exchange rate system , would likely play a critical role in this process . chinese officials have acknowledged the need to make such reforms and have announced a number of policies to that end .