for example , the continuing resolution h.r . funding for usar task forces , like other aspects of homeland security , could be increased to ensure that sufficient equipment ( and reserves ) are available to task forces . congress might consider legislation ( such as s. 930 , considered in the 108 th congress but not acted upon ) that would require the secretary of dhs to provide grants to task forces to ensure that operational , administrative , and training costs continue to be met . others may argue , however , that federal support and involvement in task forces should be minimized , as the federal need for usar task forces occurs relatively infrequently , and task forces primarily serve local government purposes . congress may wish to debate how usar task forces fit into the broader scope of federal disaster response efforts . a report issued by the general accounting office prior to the terrorist attacks of 2001 identified 24 types of teams , administered by eight federal agencies , capable of responding to terrorist incidents involving weapons of mass destruction . the extent to which usar task forces duplicate the capabilities and authorities of other federal response teams might be considered . the allocation of five usar task forces to haiti after earthquakes destroyed much of the capital city and other parts of the nation in january 2010 arguably demonstrated the best use of the usar capabilities . lives were saved and local and international burdens were shared . funds for the work of the task forces in haiti were provided by the department of state , u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . deployments to other countries may help save lives , reduce human suffering , and foster goodwill between the united states and other countries . however , some may question whether usar forces should be deployed to foreign countries on the grounds that overseas deployments may limit the number of teams and equipment available for domestic incidents . according to the fema administrator , discussions are underway with the head of usaid to determine whether additional teams should be deemed qualified for international crises . if usar continues to be used for international response efforts , congress may wish to appropriate funds for usar from multiple sources through regular order appropriations . congress may also contemplate limiting their use to domestic incidents , or limiting the number of usar teams that can be deployed overseas at one time . task forces are supported by incident support teams ( ists ) , which provide technical assistance to state and local emergency managers , coordinate the activities of multiple task forces , and provide logistical support . task forces remain on - site until the incident commander determines that no victims could possibly remain alive . comprehensive information on usar funding is not readily available , although some data have been published . federal funding for the activities of the task forces in responding to catastrophes is provided through the disaster relief fund administered by fema . in general , host employers of task force members ( generally units of local government ) serve as the primary source of funds for the task forces .