these missiles are not believed to be deployed . north korea is believed to have had extensive foreign assistance from china , russia , pakistan , and iran throughout the program . in order to achieve ranges capable of striking hawaii and targets on the u.s. mainland , some analysts believe that the taepo dong 2's payload would need to be reduced to 200 - 300 kg . some believe the taepo dong 2 may be exported to other countries in the future . in june 2006 the taepo dong 2 ( or paektusan - 2 ) was observed being assembled and fueled at the musudan - ri test site along the northeast coast of north korea . at that time , some observers believed a test was imminent while others expressed caution because considerable technical uncertainty remained . on july 4 , 2006 , north korea launched the taepo dong 2 . the launch was preceded by three shorter - range ballistic missile launches , and then followed by three more . about 40 seconds into the flight , the taepo dong 2 failed on its own during the first stage and fell into the sea of japan , according to usnorthcom ( u.s. northern command ) . causes for the failure were studied , but details were not made public . japanese sources reported some details of the missile launches , suggesting greater accuracy in their impact areas than other analyses . the first stage has been said to bear close resemblance to the chinese css - 2 and css - 3 first stage . the second stage is believed to be based on the no dong missile . the two - stage variant is assessed by some to have a range potential of as much as 3,750 km with a 700 to 1,000 kg payload and , if a third stage were added , some believe that range could be extended to 4,000 to 4,300 km with a full payload . some analysts further believe that the taepo dong 2 could deliver a 700 to 1,000 kg payload as far as 6,700 km . secretary of state clinton said any such test would "be very unhelpful in moving our relationship forward" and that it would violate a 2006 un security council resolution ( resolution 1718 ) demanding that north korea "not conduct any further nuclear test or launch of a ballistic missile. similarly , the south korean government warned any missile test would "be a serious threat. pyongyang has yet to test the guidance system , and so the missile is believed to be inaccurate . how it might be deployed ( i.e. , silo or transportable ) also remains undetermined , although some have suggested it is a road mobile system . others have suggested structural failure of the airframe , or failure of the propulsion or guidance system as the causes . the report also suggested greater russian engineering support than indicated elsewhere . some believe initial production of the taepo dong 2 may have started in 2005 , and that perhaps 20 missiles were built in 2006 .