among other provisions , p.l . 109-58 authorizes appropriations for hydrogen and fuel cell research at higher levels than requested by the president — $3.3 billion over five years . in addition to r&d funding , the bill provides tax incentives for the purchase of new fuel cell vehicles . funding for these areas is shown in table 1 . the mission of the hydrogen fuel initiative is to "research , develop , and validate fuel cells and hydrogen production , delivery , and storage technologies for transportation and stationary applications. fuel cell r&d areas include transportation systems , stationary systems , fuel processing , fuel cell components , and technology validation . the focus of hydrogen fuel r&d includes hydrogen production and delivery , fuel storage , hydrogen infrastructure , safety , codes and standards , and training and education . the freedomcar and the hydrogen fuel initiatives have each set four goals for 2015 , and share one additional goal between them . the shared goal is to produce hydrogen - fueled engine systems that achieve double to triple the efficiency of today's conventional engines at a cost competitive with conventional engines . freedomcar's individual goals mainly focus on reducing system costs for various technologies . the freedomcar goals are to develop electric drive systems with a 15-year life and significantly reduced hardware costs ; advanced internal combustion engine systems with double to triple the efficiency of current systems at no greater cost and no higher emissions than conventional engine systems ; electrical energy storage with improved life and lower cost than current systems ; and materials and manufacturing technologies that achieve a 50% weight reduction in vehicle structure , while maintaining affordability and increasing the use of recyclable / recycled materials . the four goals for the hydrogen fuel initiative focus on improvements in fuel cell technology and improvements in the storage and delivery of hydrogen fuel . the initiative's goals are to develop hydrogen fuel cell power systems that are durable , and deliver higher efficiency at lower cost than today's systems ; transportation fuel cell systems that deliver greater efficiency and lower cost , and meet or exceed emissions standards ; hydrogen refueling systems that are highly efficient and deliver fuel at the market price of gasoline ; and on - board hydrogen storage systems with improved energy density and cost over existing systems . the creation of freedomcar and the president's hydrogen fuel initiatives have raised debate over several issues . these issues include the proper role of the government in r&d , as well as the proper level of funding , and concerns over energy efficiency and fuel consumption . some environmental groups , including the sierra club , have criticized the initiatives . they argue that while funding has increased for efficient technologies , the initiatives do not require auto manufacturers to make fuel cell vehicles available to customers by any specific time . also , groups such as the natural resources defense council argued that the initiatives were put in place to forestall significant increases in national fuel economy standards . however , in 2007 congress enacted more stringent fuel economy standards for passenger cars and light trucks as part of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .