its most common use is for weather alerts . eas technology is also used in the amber alert programs administered in some states and communities . to facilitate transmittal , eas messages are classified by types of events , which are coded . these event codes speed the recognition and retransmittal process at broadcast stations . for example , a tornado warning is tor , evacuation immediate is evi , a civil emergency message is cem . when a message is received at the broadcast station , it can be relayed to the public either as a program interruption or , for television , a "crawl" at the bottom of the tv screen . in the early stages of amber alert program development the cem ( civil emergency ) event code was used for eas messages . in february 2002 , the fcc added several new event and location codes for broadcast and cable stations to use ; included was a child abduction emergency ( cae ) event code . although broadcaster participation is mandatory for national alerts , the participation of broadcast and cable stations in state and local emergency announcements is voluntary . many states have extended their amber alert programs to include missing adults or participate in other alert programs . silver alert programs , for example , are operated for the benefit of those with alzheimer's disease and other cognitive impairments . silver alerts are modeled on amber alerts and use many of the same technologies and information channels for disseminating information . crs has prepared an analysis of 11 states with active alert programs , evaluating program features such as legal authority , administrative responsibility , training , and interstate coordination . prompt response to child abductions is therefore deemed critical by many . law enforcement officers are encouraged to send out an alert if circumstances indicate that the child is in harm's way , if they have sufficient descriptive information about the child and / or the abductor for an alert , and if they believe that the immediate broadcast of an alert will help . when there is information about a vehicle used in an abduction , this information will usually be transmitted to highway message boards , if that technology is in place . while each plan sets its own parameters , most follow guidelines set by the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) . the regulations for cmas were established by the fcc through its rule - making process . in addition to message formats and other standards , regulations require three alert categories that must be carried by participating carriers: presidential , imminent threat , and amber alerts . another investment in emergency communications infrastructure that will likely benefit amber alerts and similar programs is for the transition to internet protocols in 911 call centers and networks . unlike most existing 911 systems , which use analog technology , ip - enabled networks can transmit information digitally . the american national standards institute ( ansi ) board of standards review approved the standard in december 2007 [apco american national standard ( ans ) 1.101.1-2007] . all 50 states operate amber alert programs for missing children .