india's it sector . u.s. - india merchandise trade: 2001-2004* ( $ millions ) *data for 2004 estimated based on actual data for january - november 2004 . source : u.s. international trade commission dataweb . major u.s. - indo trade issues . india's sizable population and large and growing middle class make it a potentially large market for u.s. goods and services . ( 12 ) however , a number of factorshamper increased economic ties . first , in addition to maintaining high tariff rates on imports ( especially on productsthatcompete with domestic products ) , india also assesses high surcharges and taxes on a variety of imports . majornon - tariffbarriers include sanitary and phytosanitary restrictions , import licenses , regulations that mandate that only publicsectorentities can import certain products , discriminatory government procurement practices , and the use of exportsubsidies . ( 13 ) a variety of restrictions are placed on foreign services providers and on the level of permitted fdi in certainindustries . second , india continues to maintain a number of inefficient structural policies which affects it trade , including pricecontrols for many "essential" commodities , extensive government regulation over many sectors of the economy , andextensive public ownership of businesses , many of which are poorly run . third , despite india's attempt to developinternationally competitive it industries ( such as software ) , u.s. government officials charge that india has a poorrecordin protecting intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , especially for patents and copyrights . the international intellectualproperty alliance estimated u.s. losses of $420 million due to trade piracy in 2003 - - nearly three - quarters of thisin thecategories of business and entertainment software - - and noted "very little progress in combating piracy. india's extensive array of trade and investment barriers has been criticized by u.s. government officials and businessleaders as an impediment to its own economic development , as well as to stronger u.s. - indian ties . ( 14 ) for example , in september 2004 , alan larson , u.s . under secretary of state for economic , business , and agricultural affairs,stated that"trade and investment flows between the u.s. and india are far below where they should and can be," adding thatamerican exports to india "have not fared as well" as have indian exports to the united states and that "the pictureforu.s . investment is also lackluster. he identified the primary reason for the suboptimal situation as "the slow paceofeconomic reform in india. some u.s. interest groups have expressed concern that closer u.s. - india economic ties could accelerate the practice bysome u.s. firms of outsourcing it and customer service jobs to india . ( 15 ) various proposals have been made in congressand various state governments to restrict outsourcing . work overseas . bush administration officials have expressedopposition to government restrictions on outsourcing , but have told indian officials that the best way to counter such"protectionist" pressures in the united states is to further liberalize its markets . other u.s. interest groups haveraisedconcern over the outsourcing of financial services ( such as call centers ) to other countries that entail transmittingprivateinformation of u.s. consumers . ( 16 ) u.s. officialshave urged india to enact new privacy and cybersecurity laws to addressu.s . concerns over identify theft .