table 1 . college enrollment in the fall of 2000 among spring 2000 high school graduates by parental educational attainment source: current population survey . note: columns may not sum to 100% due to rounding . table 2 displays fall 2000 college enrollment for the high school class of 2000 by family income . the rates of enrollmentfor the fall of 2000 were 35% for those from families below 150% of the poverty line and 58% for those above150% ofpoverty . high school graduates from families below 150% of poverty were over 50% more likely not tobe enrolled incollege the fall after graduation as those from families above 150% of poverty ( 65% compared to 42% ) . table 2 . college enrollment in the fall of 2000 among spring 2000 high school graduates by family income source: current population survey . note: columns may not sum to 100% due to rounding . the figures in tables 1 and 2 also support the large body of research which has established a strong link between thesocio - economic status of parents ( including income , occupation , and educational attainment ) and that of theirchildren . since the late 1960s , researchers have documented the various ways that "class background is very important indetermining who goes to college. ( 8 ) among theindicators of class background used in this research were direct measureslike family income and parent's education and more indirect measures like educational aspirations and collegepreparedness - - all have been found to be positively associated with college attendance and completion . the final section of this report takes a brief look at the combined effects of first generation status and family income onrates of college enrollment . table 3 shows rates of college enrollment in the fall of 2000 amongthose who graduated highschool in the spring of 2000 by parental educational attainment and family income . table 3 indicates that the rate of college enrollment among students from low - income families is not altered by parentaleducation - - 69% of those whose parents did not attain a bachelor's degree were not enrolled , compared to 66% ofthosewhose parents have a bachelor's degree ( this difference is not statistically significant ) . conversely , table3 reveals thatparental educational attainment is strongly associated with college attendance among students above150% of poverty . atthis income level , 51% of the graduates whose parents lack a bachelor's degree went on to college compared to 75%of thegraduates whose parents have a bachelor's degree . ( 9 ) table 3 . college enrollment in the fall of 2000 among spring 2000 high school graduates by parent's educational attainment and family income status source: current population survey . note: columns may not sum to 100% due to rounding . the findings presented here indicate that rates of college enrollment vary greatly by family income and parental educational attainment . rates of college enrollment among low - income and first generation students were muchlowerthan the overall rate for 2000 high school graduates . in the final analysis of the combined effects of these factors,firstgeneration status was found to have little association with the rate of enrollment of low - income students , but wasstronglyassociated with the rate of enrollment of students from families with greater income .