the report addressed the following . the fcc's junk fax procedures and outcomes . the strengths and weaknesses of fcc's procedures . the fcc's junk fax management challenges . the gao found that the fcc had instituted procedures for receiving and acknowledging the increasing number of junk fax complaints , but that the numbers of investigations and enforcement actions had remained mostly the same . for example , the gao stated that in 2000 , the fcc recorded about 2,200 junk fax complaints ; in 2005 , the fcc recorded over 46,000 complaints . however , in total , the gao found that the fcc's enforcement bureau issued only 261 warnings from 2000 through 2005 . further , the gao discovered that although the bureau had ordered six companies to pay forfeitures totaling over $6.9 million for continuing to violate the junk fax rules after receiving warnings , none of that total had been collected by the department of justice . the gao also stated that fcc officials cited competing demands , resource constraints , and the rising sophistication of violators in hiding their identities as hindrances to enforcement . with respect to strengths and weaknesses in the fcc's procedures , the gao determined that an emphasis on customer service , an effort to document consumers' complaints , and an attempt to target enforcement resources efficiently were strengths in fcc's procedures ; however , inefficient data management , resulting in time - consuming manual data entry , data errors , and — most importantly — the exclusion of the majority of complaints from decisions about investigations and enforcement , continue to be weaknesses . further , the gao stated that the fcc does not provide consumers with adequate guidance or information to support the fcc's enforcement efforts . finally , the gao stated that fcc faces management challenges in carrying out its junk fax responsibilities . the fcc has no clearly articulated long - term or annual goals for junk fax monitoring and enforcement , and it is not analyzing the data it collects . without analysis , the fcc cannot assess whether it needs to change its rules , procedures , or consumer guidance guidelines . most importantly , the gao found that without performance goals and measures and without analysis of complaint and enforcement data , it was not possible to explore the effectiveness of current enforcement measures . the jfpa contains the following specific provisions relating to fax advertising . provides an "established business relationship" ( ebr ) exemption , allowing businesses , political organizations , and trade associations to send advertisements and solicitations to persons with whom they have an existing relationship . requires organizations to place a "clear and conspicuous" notice on the first page of each fax informing the recipient how to opt out of future faxes — the notice must include u.s. telephone and fax numbers and a "cost - free" way for recipients to make their requests . requires that businesses be able to accept opt - out requests 24-hours a day , seven days a week .