portal deployment is ongoing . one alternative to portals is to collect the chemical sample using a handheld vacuum "wand" . another is to test an object handled by the passenger , such as a boarding pass , for residues transferred from the passenger's hands . in this case , the secondary object is used as the carrier between the passenger and the analyzing equipment . the olfactory ability of dogs is sensitive enough to detect trace amounts of many compounds , but several factors have inhibited the regular use of canines for passenger screening . dogs trained in explosives detection can generally only work for brief periods , have significant upkeep costs , are unable to communicate the identity of the detected explosives residue , and require a human handler when performing their detection role . in addition , direct contact between dogs and airline passengers raises liability concerns . direct detection of explosives concealed on passengers in bulk quantities has been another area of federal interest . technology development efforts in this area include portal systems based on techniques such as x - ray backscatter imaging , millimeter wave energy analysis , and terahertz imaging . as such systems detect only bulk quantities of explosives , they would not raise "nuisance alarms" on passengers who have recently handled explosives for innocuous reasons . some versions could simultaneously detect other threats , such as nonmetallic weapons . on the other hand , trace detection techniques are also likely to detect bulk quantities of explosives and may alert screening personnel to security concerns about a passenger who has had contact with explosives but is not actually carrying an explosive device when screened . current deployments for passenger screening are focused on trace detection , and the remainder of this report does not discuss bulk detection . however , many of the policy issues discussed below would apply similarly to bulk detection equipment . any strategy for deploying and operating passenger explosives detection portals must consider a number of challenges . organizational challenges include deciding where and how detectors are used , projecting costs , and developing technical and regulatory standards . operational challenges include maximizing passenger throughput , responding to erroneous and innocuous detections , ensuring passenger acceptance of new procedures , minimizing the potential for intentional disruption of the screening process , and providing for research and development into future generations of detection equipment , including techniques for detecting novel explosives . for security reasons , many technical details of equipment performance are not publicly available , which makes independent analysis of technical performance challenging . an important component of a deployment strategy is identifying where and how passenger explosives detection equipment will be used . portals could be deployed widely , so that all locations benefit from them , or they could be used only at selected locations , where they can most effectively address and mitigate risk . in any given location , portals could be used as a primary screening technology for all passengers , or as a secondary screening technology for selected passengers only . widespread deployment and use for primary screening might provide more uniform risk reduction , but would require many more portals and thus increase costs .