most u.s. agriculturalproducers support the agreement . for example,the u.s. grains council announced that , in partnership with the national grain sorghum producers and the nationalcorn growers association , it"...applaud[s] the successful negotiations..." of the fta . ( 11 ) an official with the grocery manufacturers of america said the dominican republic "'...is a greatmarket for food , agriculture , and beverage products,'...[and] an excellent potential market for u.s. beer , snack foods,pet food , nuts , and breakfast cereals. ( 12 ) the sugar provisions in the agreement with the dominican republic do not seem as controversial as those reached with the central american countries . thecontinuing precedent of market - opening , however , worries the u.s. sugar industry . the tariff - rate quota ( trq ) onsugar for the dominican republic wouldincrease by 10,000 metric tons the first year , increase by 2% annually for years 2-15 , then increase by a smalleramount in perpetuity . the tariff on above - quotaimports would not change . dale hathaway , a senior fellow at the national center for food and agriculture policy,said the increase in the dominicanrepublic's cap on sugar was "not significant. ( 13 ) the u.s. sugar industry group argued , however , that more imports from the dominican republic couldjeopardize the stability of domestic prices , which would help neither country . ( 14 ) textiles and apparel from the dominican republic would become duty - free and quota - free immediately , if they met the agreement's rules of origin , whichinclude general rules for all signatories and specific rules for each country . the u.s. trade representative says that the fta with the dominican republic "...will ensure effective enforcement of domestic labor laws , establish acooperative program to improve labor laws and enforcement , and build the capacity of the dominican republic tomonitor and enforce labor rights. department of state , however , has recognized that there have been widespread problems with putting workerrights into practice , even though theconstitution of the dominican republic and its 1992 labor code provide for broad worker rights . ( 22 ) representatives of the afl - cio and thedominican laborgroup consejo nacional de unidad sindical ( cnus ) have called for further reform of dominican laws , effectiveenforcement provisions that allow for tradesanctions , and protection against trade law violations . ( 23 ) human rights watch reports that women "...who become pregnant are routinely fired from jobsandshut out of employment in the dominican republic's export - processing sector," and such abuse of workers wouldbe allowed to continue , because caftadoes not prohibit workplace discrimination . ( 24 ) workers' groups also fear the loss of protections under current u.s. unilateral trade programs such as cbi . ( 25 ) the dominican republic also acceded to other chapters of cafta , including dispute settlement , trade remedies , electronic commerce , andtelecommunications . these chapters would establish a process for resolving disputes , set out rules for safeguards,keep transmission of digital productsduty - free , and ensure certain standards affecting suppliers of telecommunications services . there are also chapterson customs administration , technical barriersto trade , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , and transparency of laws and regulations .