epa v. whitman . while this rmrr proposal was pending , the eleventh circuit rendered its long - awaited decision in epa v. whitman . whitman arose when the epa determined that the tva violated the caa through various rehabilitation projects at its coal - fired electric power plants that went beyond rmrr , but were undertaken without permits . it embodied this determination in an administrative compliance order ( aco ) . the aco was affirmed by epa's environmental appeals board , which also endorsed the agency's multi - factor test for rmrr applied in wepco . the eleventh circuit , however , found that although the caa empowers epa to issue acos with the status of law , the caa was unconstitutional to the extent that severe civil and criminal penalties can be imposed by a court for noncompliance with such an agency order , generally issued without an adjudication . rather , epa must prove the caa violation in district court . the meaning of each of these phrases has been the subject of litigation . given that a mere modification triggers nspss and nsr , it is unsurprising that an entire "reconstruction" of an existing facility does so as well . epa defines a "reconstruction" as — replacement of components of an existing facility to such an extent that ( 1 ) [t]he fixed capital cost of the new components exceeds 50 percent of the fixed capital cost that would be required to construct a comparable entirely new facility , and ( 2 ) [i]t is technologically and economically feasible to meet the applicable [nspss] . observe that in contrast with modifications , a change in a facility can constitute a reconstruction irrespective of whether it increases emissions . but let's return to modifications . epa's definition of "modification" echoes the act's definition , but also states six kinds of changes in a stationary source the agency does not consider to be modifications — based on its view that congress could not have intended that every change at a source , no matter how minor , would subject the source to heightened pollution - control requirements . the most debated of these epa - developed exceptions is for rmrr — that is: [m]aintenance , repair , and replacement , which the [epa] administrator determines to be routine for a source category.... until recently ( see below ) , epa regulations did not further specify the kinds of activities included as rmrr . rather , eligibility for the rmrr exemption was through case - by - case analysis , "weighing the nature , extent , purpose , frequency , and cost of the proposed work , as well as other relevant factors , to arrive at a common sense determination. this case - by - case approach of epa was approved in the leading case of wisconsin electric power co. v. reilly ( " wepco " ) . wepco had concluded that "extensive renovation" of its generating units was needed and submitted a proposed "life extension" program to the state . among the renovations proposed were repair and replacement of the turbine generators , boilers , mechanical and electrical auxiliaries , and the common plant support facilities .