objectives . the objectives of the u.s. occupations of both countries have beensummed up in two lists of four "d"s. in both japan and germany , the primary objective was demilitarization . all u.s. plannersagreed that the ability of both countries to wage war in the future should be destroyed . this included destroyingelements of militarypower , including the economic apparatus that fueled war , and punishing war criminals . in japan ,the next goals were the disarmament and decentralization of the economic apparatus , the latter through thedismantling of the large industrial and bankinggroups . in germany , they were denazification and deindustrialization . regarding the fourth "d" , democratization , many u.s.policymakers and occupation planners doubted that the japanese and germans had the cultural background andpsychologicaldisposition necessary to function in a democracy . after the occupations began , democratization assumed greaterweight in bothexperiences , as those forces who had argued that the inhabitants of those countries were capable of establishingdemocracies gainedcredibility , and as the start of the cold war fostered the concept of a community of democracies as a counterweightto the sovietunion . humanitarian situation . the occupations commenced amidst a grave humanitarian situation , with large parts of the population homeless , and on subsistence diets or below . in japan , according to onesource , the war had produced 1.8 million military and civilian casualties , and destroyed 25% of japan's nationalwealth . air attacks had destroyed 20% of the country's housing ( and a greater amount in some cities ) , and 30% of its industrialcapacity . ( 5 ) in germany ,between a quarter to a half of housing and transport had been destroyed , leaving some 20 million homeless in thewestern zones . ( 6 ) although the united states provided humanitarian aid at the outset to ward off mass hunger and starvation,occupation authorities andoversight officials soon worried that the u.s. will to continue such relief efforts would flag well before the needfor aid diminished . this trepidation was one consideration reorienting economic policies . in 1949 , under pressure from congress,military governorlucius d. clay abandoned a central feature of occupation policy in germany ( with which he hadoriginally agreed ) : the punitivedismantling of what was left of germany's industrial base to make germans pay for waging war . ( 7 ) instead , he actively promotedgermany's economic revival . in japan , the inter - agency swncc approved in january 1948 aneconomic recovery program"intended to make japan self - sufficient through the 'early revival of the japanese economy'" and encouragingindustrial growth andforeign trade to enable japan to "make its 'proper contribution to the economic rehabilitation of the worldeconomy.....'" ( 8 ) accomplishments . in both countries , the occupations are credited with the construction of functioning democracies . in germany , the direct occupation period ended in thewest with the 1949 establishmentof the federal republic of germany , a parliamentary system built on improvements in the constitution andinstitutions of germany'smajor experience with democracy , the 1919-1933 weimar republic . in japan , the scaprevamped the laws , institutions , and moresof the country's "divine right" monarchy . occupation of iraq ? elections for village officials were held in january 1946 , followed bycounty officials inmarch and city officials in may .