the simulated decline inu.s . production results in average international prices per pound of cotton 6 cents higher than realized in 1999 / 00,12 cents higherthan in 2000 / 01 and 22 cents higher than in 2001 / 02 . higher prices would reduce the demand for cotton . thus theinitial priceincreases would be lowered by 1 , 2 , and 6 cents per pound respectively in the three marketing years simulated . initial price increasesalso would be offset by shifting world production to non - subsidizing countries in the medium and long terms . overall , however , theicac study says that the removal of cotton subsidies would have had a net positive effect on the world price ofcotton by 3 cents in1999 / 2000 , 6 cents in 2000 / 01 , and 11 cents in 2001 / 02 . u.s. and other country subsidies are not the only factor depressing world cotton prices . icac says that weakconsumer demandresulting from the recent economic slowdown and continuing competition from synthetic fibers are preventing worldcottonconsumption from more rapid growth . in addition , says icac , improved technology , the strong u.s. dollar , andthe expansion ofcotton production into new areas contributed to the increase in world cotton supply in 2001 . a recent world bank report used results from the icac study to illustrate the effect of u.s. and other countries' subsidies on cottonproducers in the wca region . ( 12 ) according tothe world bank report , icac's estimate of a 11 cent per pound increase in the netaverage world price for cotton ( in 2001 / 2002 ) would translate into revenue gains of $250 million a year for wcafarmers . oxfam , abritish non - governmental organization , also contributed to the debate over the impact of cotton subsidies , withpublication of a reportthat estimated revenue losses to african farmers from u.s. cotton subsidies . ( 13 ) both the world bank and oxfam have played a majorrole in mobilizing public opinion in support of the african cotton initiative . the u.s. responded to the cotton initiative by proposing that cotton be included in a comprehensive negotiated agreement to cutsubsidies and tariffs on all farm products and eliminate tariffs and non - tariff barriers on manufactured goods,including textiles . ( 14 ) the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) maintains that the problems affecting cotton extend beyond the issue ofsubsidies and includefactors such as competition by synthetic fibers , the slowdown in world economic growth , and higher yields due tofavorable weatherconditions . ustr cites many barriers that limit market opportunities and distort trade of cotton: trade distortingdomestic supportapplied by the united states , the european union , china and some developing countries ; high average allowedtariffs for cotton andtextiles and clothing ; non - tariff barriers such as non - transparent customs procedures , difficult and costly markingand labelingrequirements , and burdensome testing methods ; and industrial policies related to man - made fibers that distort themarket and displacesales of cotton and cotton products .