reimbursement . current law does not require replenishment of commodities released from the trust , butdoes provide for ways to do it . the secretary of agriculture may acquire commodities through purchases fromproducers or in the market , if the secretarydetermines that such purchases will not unduly disrupt the market . funds for such purchases must be authorizedin an appropriation act . the secretary mayalso replenish the trust by designation to the trust of commodities already owned by the ccc . origins of the trust . during the 1970's , congress debated the creation of either a permanentgovernment - held stock of grain or a fund to promote global food security . advocates of a grain reserve argued thatit would provide a buffer to the vagaries ofagricultural production , ensuring grain availability , regardless of domestic supply conditions , in case of urgent need . they argued , in addition , that a reservewould serve as a surplus disposal mechanism in times of excess production , thereby strengthening farm prices . supporters of a fund , on the other hand,contended that dollar resources would provide more flexibility in meeting urgent needs , and that factors other thanfood shortages , such as transportation or highcommodity costs , were more likely to impede the delivery of food to needy people in emergency situations . areserve of funds also would not have thepotential price - depressing effect that a release of commodities could have . events overtook this debate in 1979 when the soviet union invaded afghanistan , prompting the carteradministration to embargo all u.s. grain shipments tothe ussr . to prevent loss of revenue to exporters and adverse impacts on domestic commodity prices which mighthave resulted from the embargo , the cccoffered to purchase from u.s. suppliers grain previously committed to the soviet union . through this process theccc acquired 4 million metric tons ofwheat , with which to establish a grain reserve . uses . the statute authorizes two uses for the trust . first , the secretary of agriculture has authority torelease up to 500,000 metric tons of eligible commodities for urgent humanitarian relief in the case of unanticipatedfood needs in developing countries and torelease an additional 500,000 metric tons of eligible commodities that could have been , but were not , released inprevious years . second , the secretary hasauthority to release commodities from the reserve when she determines that u.s. domestic supplies are so limitedthat commodities cannot be made availablefor regular programming in p.l . 480 foreign food aid programs . ( 2 ) exchange of commodities . a commodity in the trust may be exchanged for another u.s. commodity ofequal value . in fy2002 , wheat released from the trust was sold and the proceeds used to purchase corn , vegetableoil , and dry beans for distribution insouthern africa . commodities in the emerson trust are held as assets of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) . ( 3 ) when commodities are released from thetrust , the ccc incurs a loss ( the value of the assets it no longer holds. ) the trust is subsequentlyreimbursed for the commodities released with a transfer of funds from p.l . the 1998 act provides that theccc be reimbursed by p.l .