77 ) , but the senate did not . if congress had enacted a joint resolution of disapproval ( presumably over a presidential veto ) , the debt limit would not have been increased by the additional $500 billion , and the office of management and budget would have been required to sequester budgetary resources on a "pro rata" basis , subject to sequestration procedures and exemptions provided in sections 253 , 255 , and 256 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended . the house passed a disapproval resolution ( h.j.res . third , after the debt limit had been increased by the first $900 billion and upon another certification that the debt subject to limit was again within $100 billion of the debt limit , congress had 15 calendar days to enact into law a joint resolution of disapproval to prevent the third automatic increase in the debt limit ( again over a presumed presidential veto ) . nearly all of the outstanding debt of the federal government is subject to a statutory limit . the house again adopted another disapproval resolution ( h.j.res 98 ) , but the senate subsequently rejected a motion to proceed to the resolution . therefore , the debt limit was increased by $1.2 trillion , because other criteria that would have allowed for a larger amount were not met . in summary , while an initial increase in the debt limit of $400 billion was effective immediately and not subject to congressional disapproval , subsequent additional increases of $500 billion and $1.2 trillion were subject to congressional disapproval . that is , for either of the two subsequent additional increases in the debt limit , if congress had enacted a joint resolution of disapproval , the debt limit would not have been increased . expedited procedures that limited debate and prevented amendments were established for the joint resolution of disapproval to ensure timely consideration . although only a majority of each chamber would have been necessary to agree to a resolution of disapproval , to prevent an increase , supermajority support would have been necessary . this is because if the treasury had advised the president that further borrowing was required to meet existing commitments , the president might normally be expected to veto the congressional resolution of disapproval . congress can override a presidential veto , but to do so would require the support of two - thirds of each chamber . in 2013 , similar congressional disapproval procedures were included in legislation suspending the debt limit through february 7 , 2014 ( h.r . 2775 , 113 th congress ) . in this instance , congress had 22 calendar days to enact , presumably over the president's veto , legislation disapproving the suspension and subsequent adjustment to the debt limit authorized by the default prevention act of 2013 ( section 1002 of p.l . 113-46 , continuing appropriations act , 2014 , enacted on october 17 , 2013 ) . on october 30 , pursuant to the act and h.res . 391 , the house passed a joint resolution disapproving the suspension of the debt limit by a vote of 222-191 .