in comparison , foreign firms had over 6,600 affiliates operating in the united states . affiliates in europe , for instance , which had been the largest employer , fell to second place behind affiliates in asia . during recent economic downturns , both u.s. parent firms and their foreign affiliates lost employment in the petroleum and finance sectors , although both gained employment in the services and wholesale trade sectors . furthermore , employment gains and losses among mncs more likely reflect fundamental shifts within the u.s. economy than any formal or informal efforts to shift employment abroad . employment trends among foreign affiliates also reflect growing trade links between the united states and other areas , particularly asia , as indicated in figure 10 . between 2000 and 2014 , employment among the foreign affiliates of u.s. parent firms tripled in latin america , and nearly tripled among affiliates located in asia , particularly in china . in other geographical regions , employment gains were less robust . in addition , affiliates in canada and mexico experienced relatively modest increases in employment . american direct investment abroad has grown sharply since the mid - 1990s , raising questions for many observers about the effects of such investment on the u.s. economy . these questions seem pertinent since american multinational corporations lost shares of u.s. gdp over the last decade and their domestic employment had declined until the mid - 1990s . increased economic activity abroad relative to that in the united states increased overseas affiliate employment in some industries , including manufacturing . most of this affiliate activity , however , is geared toward supplying the local markets . some observers believe u.s. direct investment abroad is harmful to u.s. workers because it shifts jobs abroad . there is no conclusive evidence in the data collected to date to indicate that current investment trends are substantially different from those of previous periods or that jobs are moving offshore at a rate that is significantly different from previous periods . there are instances when firms shift activities abroad to take advantage of lower labor costs . however , it is clear from the data that the majority of u.s. direct investment abroad is in developed countries where wages , markets , industries , and consumers' tastes are similar to those in the united states . u.s. direct investment in these developed countries is oriented toward serving the markets where the affiliates are located and they tend , in the aggregate , to boost exports from the united states . in addition , foreign firms have been pouring record amounts of money into the united states to acquire existing u.s. firms , to expand existing subsidiaries , or to establish "greenfield" or new investments . in the 114 th and 115 th congresses , members of congress expressed concerns about u.s. direct investment abroad through measures that would offer certain tax advantages to u.s. firms that shifted parts of their operations back to the united states and through measures that are directed at curbing tax havens and tax inversions and other practices that shift taxes from the united states to foreign locations .