reg . 367 , january 4 , 2007 ) . dod is responsible for some large releases of perchlorate into the environment and has allotted significant resources to address this problem . dod has spent more than $114 million on research activities regarding perchlorate treatment technologies , detection methods , toxicity studies , and substitutes . additional funds have been spent on cleanup . although remediation has proceeded at some sites , cleanups typically are driven by drinking water standards or other established cleanup standards . with no federal standard , cleanup goals and responsibilities have been ambiguous outside of california and massachusetts where standards have been set . in 2006 , after epa established a dwel for perchlorate and issued cleanup guidance based on the dwel , dod adopted a policy setting 24 ppb as the level of concern to be used in managing perchlorate releases ( unless a more stringent federal or state standard exists . the policy applies broadly to dod installations and former military lands , and directs the services to test for perchlorate when it is reasonably expected that a release has occurred . under the policy , if perchlorate levels exceed 24 ppb , a site - specific risk assessment must be conducted ; if the assessment indicates that the perchlorate could result in adverse health effects , then the site must be prioritized for risk management . dod uses a relative risk site evaluation framework to help prioritize environmental restoration work and to allocate resources among sites . epa has withdrawn the 2006 perchlorate remediation guidance and recommends that its regional offices now consider using the interim health advisory level of 15 ppb for cleanup . dod may follow suit and adopt the new level for managing perchlorate releases . in the 111 th congress , as in the past several congresses , legislation has been introduced concerning the regulation of perchlorate under the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) . 3206 would require epa to propose a drinking water regulation for perchlorate within 12 months of enactment of the legislation , and to promulgate a final regulation no later than 18 months after epa published a proposed rule . additionally , congress has provided some funding for the remediation of perchlorate contamination of ground water and public drinking water supplies . the explanatory statement for the department of defense appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l . 3326 ) , specifies that $1.6 million is intended for the cleanup of perchlorate contaminated drinking water wells , and another $3.5 million is intended for inland empire ( ca ) perchlorate remediation . two similar bills , h.r . 4252 , each entitled the inland empire perchlorate ground water plume assessment act of 2009 , would direct the secretary of the interior , acting through the director of the united states geological survey , to ( 1 ) complete a study of water resources in california , including the rialto - colton basin ( h.r . 2316 ) , or ( 2 ) complete a study of water resources , specifically the rialto - colton basin ( h.r .