it does not define "person. nevertheless , as elsewhere in the united states code , "persons" for purposes of uigea means individuals as well as "corporations , companies , associations , firms , partnerships , societies , and joint stock companies. it does not define the "business of betting or wagering," although it defines what it is not and defines the terms that provide the grist for such a business: bets or wagers . uigea creates a limited federal civil cause of action to prevent and restrain violations of the act . it authorizes federal and state attorneys general to sue in federal court for injunctive relief to prevent and restrain violations of the act . it does not foreclose other causes of action on other provisions of state or federal law , but it does preclude suits in state court to enforce the act . it does not expressly authorize a private cause of action . it does not expressly offer attorneys general or anyone else any prospect of relief other than the federal court orders necessary to prevent and restrain . moreover , it expressly limits the instances when the attorneys general may institute proceedings against internet service providers and financial institutions . they may only proceed civilly against financial institutions to block transactions involving unlawful internet gambling unless the institution is directly involved in an unlawful internet gambling business . barring application of the same direct involvement exception , the attorneys general may sue internet service providers under the act only to block access to unlawful internet gambling sites or to hyperlinks to such sites under limited circumstances . subject to an exception that mirrors the direct involvement exception , the act also removes providers from the coverage of the wire act provision under which law enforcement officials may insist that communications providers block the wire communications of wire act violators . neither of the provisions restricting the civil liability of financial institutions and of internet service providers explicitly immunizes them from criminal prosecution for aiding or abetting or for conspiracy . although uigea restricts the civil liability of financial institutions , it binds them under a regulatory enforcement scheme outlined in the act . the act calls upon the secretary of the treasury and the governors of the federal reserve board in conjunction with the attorney general to create a regulatory mechanism that identifies and blocks financial transactions prohibited in the act . among its other features , the mechanism must admit to practical exemptions and ensure that lawful internet gambling transactions are not blocked . good faith compliance insulates regulated entities from both regulatory and civil liability . commentators seem to concur . however , prosecutions under the wire act have been more prevalent , at least thus far . violations of section 1955 are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years and / or fines of the greater of not more than twice the gain or loss associated with the offense or $250,000 ( $500,000 for an organization ) . moreover , the federal government may confiscate any money or other property used in violation of the section . the offense may also provide the foundation for a prosecution under the travel act , the money laundering statutes , and rico .