it has not yet been transmitted to congress . the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 prohibits the social security commissioner or social security administration ( ssa ) from using any of the funds appropriated by the act to pay compensation to ssa employees to administer social security benefit payments under any u.s. - mexico totalization agreement that would not otherwise be payable . other legislation has been introduced , the loophole elimination and verification enforcement act ( or leave act ) , that would state it is the sense of the house that the u.s. - mexico totalization agreement "is inappropriate public policy and should not take effect. another bill introduced in the 112 th congress would address a constitutional issue with the existing totalization agreement process . under current law , once an agreement is transmitted to congress , it becomes effective at the end of the period during which at least one house has been in session 60 days , unless either house adopts a resolution of disapproval . this is a legislative veto , and the supreme court held such vetoes to be unconstitutional . the social security totalization agreement reform act of 2011 ( or star act ) would , among other things , address the legislative veto problem by implementing a new approval process . a residency definition in an income tax treaty will override these residency rules . if an individual is defined as a resident of a foreign country under a treaty , then he or she is a nonresident alien for purposes of determining his or her u.s. tax liability regardless of whether the "green card" or "substantial presence" test is met . resident aliens are subject to social security and medicare taxes on wages ( fica taxes ) and on self - employment income ( seca taxes ) in the same manner as u.s. citizens . in general , nonresident aliens are subject to fica taxes on compensation from work within the united states under the rules applicable to u.s. citizens and resident aliens , but are not subject to seca taxes . a list of exempted services in irc ยง3121 ( b ) is generally applicable to all who work in the united states . examples include services performed by foreign workers temporarily admitted to the united states to perform agricultural labor and services performed by employees of foreign governments and qualifying international organizations . also exempted are services performed by individuals with f - , j - , m - , or q - visas that meet the purpose of admittance and services performed in guam by h - 2 visa holders who are residents of the philippines . the united states has entered into totalization agreements with numerous countries that have social security programs . the intent of these agreements is to provide individuals who work in two countries with the opportunity to qualify for social security benefits in one country and to avoid double coverage and taxation .