sec . comprehensive review of professionalism and eth ics program s for special operations forces ( a ) review required. — the secretary of defense shall conduct a comprehensive review of the ethics programs and professionalism programs of the united states special operations command and of the military departments for officers and other military personnel serving in special operations forces . ( b ) elements of the review. — the review conducted under subsection ( a ) shall specifically include a description and assessment of each of the following: ( 1 ) the professionalism and ethics standards of the united states special operations command and affiliated component commands . ( 2 ) the ethics programs and professionalism programs of the military departments available for special operations forces . ( 3 ) the ethics programs and professionalism programs of the united states special operations command and affiliated component commands . ( 4 ) the roles and responsibilities of the military departments and the united states special operations command and affiliated component commands in administering , overseeing , managing , and ensuring compliance and participation of special operations forces in ethics programs and professionalism programs , including an identification of — ( a ) any gaps in the administration , oversight , and management of such programs and in ensuring the compliance and participation in such programs ; and ( b ) any additional guidance that may be required for a systematic , integrated approach in administering , over - seeing , and managing such programs and in ensuring compliance with and participation in such programs in order to address issues and improve adherence to professionalism and ethics standards . ( 5 ) the adequacy of the existing management and oversight framework for ensuring that all ethics programs and professionalism programs available to special operations forces meet department standards . ( 6 ) tools and metrics for identifying and assessing individual and organizational ethics and professionalism issues with respect to special operations forces . ( 7 ) tools and metrics for assessing the effectiveness of existing ethics programs and professionalism programs in improving or addressing individual and organizational ethics - related and professionalism issues with respect to special operations forces . ( 8 ) any additional actions that may be required to address or improve individual and organizational ethics and professionalism issues with respect to special operations forces . ( 9 ) any additional actions that may be required to improve the oversight and accountability by senior leaders of ethics and professionalism - related issues with respect to special operations forces . ( c ) limitation on delegation. — the secretary of defense may only delegate responsibility for any element of the review required by subsection ( a ) to the assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low intensity conflict , in coordination with other appropriate offices of the secretary of defense and the secretaries of the military departments . ( d ) deadline for submittal of review. — the secretary of defense shall submit the review required by subsection ( a ) to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives by not later than march 1 , 2019 . ( e ) definitions.