clearly al qaeda is in transition . and allied forces have captured or killed . ( 12 ) but do operatives even necessarily need to be members ? it is apparent from some of those apprehended in failed plots that it is not essential to be formally "in"al qaeda in order to carry out attacks . operatives seem to vary , from the best - trained , controlled and financedprofessional cadres , such as mohammed atta ( who led the september 11th attacks ) , to less - trained and relatively uncontrolled volunteers , such asahmed ressam ( who intended to blow up los angelesinternational airport ) and richard reid ( who tried to detonate plastic explosives in his shoes aboard an americanairlines transatlantic flight ) . ( 13 ) al qaedaeven acts like a foundation at times , reportedly giving grants to existing local terrorist groups who present"promising" plans for attacks that serve theorganization's general goals . ( 14 ) unlike manytraditional terrorist groups , al qaeda has no single standard operating procedure , although it does have awell - developed manual for its operations . benefitting from osama bin laden's considerable experience in business,the organization is said to be structuredlike a modern corporation , reflective of management concepts of the early 1990s , including bottom - up and top - downnetworks , a common "mission statement,"and entrepreneurial thinking even at the lowest levels . this makes it extraordinarily flexible and , many believe , ableto survive serious blows . ( 15 ) al qaeda has also developed strong ties to other terrorist organizations , some new and some long - standing . ( 16 ) osama bin laden formed an umbrella group inlate 1998 , "the international islamic front for jihad against jews and crusaders," which included not only alqaeda , but also groups from egypt , algeria,pakistan , and bangladesh . some argue that al qaeda has been something of a hybrid terrorist organization for sometime . ( 17 ) a sampling of groups currentlythought to be connected includes the moro islamic liberation front ( philippines ) , jemaah islamiah ( southeastasia ) , egyptian islamic jihad ( merged with alqaeda in 2001 ) , al - ansar mujahidin ( chechnya ) , al - gamaa al - islamiya ( egypt , and has a worldwide presence ) , abusayyaf ( philippines ) , the islamicmovement of uzbekistan , and harakat ul - mujahidin ( pakistan / kashmir ) . some experts see increased reliance onconnections to other groups as a sign of al qaeda's weakness ; others point to enhanced cooperation with othergroups as a worrisome indicator of strength,especially with groups that formerly focused on local issues and now display evidence of convergence on al qaeda'sinternational anti - u.s. , anti - west agenda . an important question is whether al qaeda might be evolving further into a new form , more like a movement thana formal organization , increasingly diffuseinternationally and less reliant upon its own membership . whether that transition will lead to something more or less dangerous is a point of contention . on one hand , clear progress inapprehending or killing senior leaders of al qaeda has been evident .