as noted above , e.o . president bush complied . more recently , congress has directed the president or agency heads to undertake a declassification review of records pertaining to specific matters and to release them as appropriate . for example , congress in 2000 directed the president to "order all federal agencies and departments that possess relevant information [about the murders of churchwomen in el salvador] to make every effort to declassify and release" them to victims' families . in 2002 , congress directed the secretary of defense to submit to congress and to the secretary of veterans affairs "a comprehensive plan for the review , declassification , and submittal" of all information related to project 112 — a series of biological and chemical warfare vulnerability tests conducted by the department of defense — that would be relevant for that project's participants' health care . in 2004 , congress directed the secretary of defense to "review and , as determined appropriate , revise the classification policies of the department of defense with a view to facilitating the declassification of data that is potentially useful for the monitoring and assessment of the health of members of the armed forces who have been exposed to environmental hazards during deployments overseas. in 2007 , congress directed the director of the central intelligence agency ( cia ) to make public a version of the executive summary of the cia office of the inspector general report on "cia accountability regarding findings and conclusions of the joint inquiry into intelligence community activities before and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001," declassified "to the maximum extent possible , consistent with national security. and in 2014 , congress directed the director of national intelligence ( dni ) to conduct a declassification review of documents collected during the raid that killed osama bin laden , requiring a justification for materials that remain classified after the review . the current standards for classifying and declassifying information were last amended on december 29 , 2009 , in executive order 13526 . under these standards , the president , vice president , agency heads , and any other officials designated by the president may classify information upon a determination that the unauthorized disclosure of such information could reasonably be expected to damage national security . such information must be owned by , produced by , or under the control of the federal government , and must concern one of the following: military plans , weapons systems , or operations ; foreign government information ; intelligence activities , intelligence sources / methods , cryptology ; foreign relations or foreign activities of the united states , including confidential sources ; scientific , technological , or economic matters relating to national security ; federal programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities ; vulnerabilities or capabilities of national security systems ; or weapons of mass destruction . information may be classified at one of three levels based on the amount of danger that its unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause to national security . information is classified as "top secret" if its unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause "exceptionally grave damage" to national security .