policy in iraq . firms ? c ) contrary to persistent russian belief , the united states does not control the price of oil and cannotguarantee specificprice levels . u.s. officials reportedly suggested an informal "gentleman's agreement" to respect russian economic interests in iraq . ( 10 ) russiawanted concrete , unequivocal guarantees . as one russian think tank director put it , "there were talks with the u.s.about russianeconomic interests in iraq , but they did not succeed . there were [american] expressions of sympathy but noguarantees. ( 11 ) on february 28 , 2003 , the u.s. state department designated three chechen groups with alleged links to al qaeda as terroristorganizations . on march 6 , the senate unanimously approved the strategic offensive reductions treaty , and onmarch 10 , senlugar introduced a bill ( s. 580 ) to exempt russia from the provisions of the jackson - vanik amendment . none of thesemoves are directly related to iraq , except perhaps in their timing . ( 12 ) the bush administration also brandished sticks as well as carrots . ambassador to russia alexander vershbow reportedly toldrussian reporters on march 12 that a russian veto of the u.s. - backed security council resolution on iraq woulddamage bilateralrelations . vershbow mentioned cooperation on security , energy , antiterrorism , antimissile defenses , and the spaceprogram as areasthat could be adversely affected by a russian veto of the resolution . in february 2003 , russian opposition to u.s. military action against iraq hardened . february 9-12 , putin traveled to berlin and parisand joined french president chirac and german chancellor schroeder in a joint declaration stating that there wasstill an alternativeto war and that russia , france , and germany were determined to work together to complete disarmament in iraqpeacefully . ( 14 ) on march 2 , putin rejected regime change as a legitimate goal in iraq . "[t]he international community cannot interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to change its regime.... [t]he only legitimate goal the united nations canpursue in thissituation is the disarmament of iraq. ( 15 ) on march10 , foreign minister ivanov declared that if the u.s. - backed resolutionauthorizing war was submitted to the unsc , russia would vote against it. ( 16 ) soon after the u.s. - led coalition began military operations in iraq , putin called the attack "a big mistake," "unjustified," and insistedthat military action be ended quickly . russian media , like that in many other european countries , took a generallynegative attitudetoward coalition military action , emphasizing innocent civilian casualties and coalition mistakes and problems . inrussia , however,the kremlin exercises very strong influence over the media , especially tv . russian public opinion overwhelminglyopposed whatmost russians saw as u.s. aggression . there were large anti - war rallies in major cities and spontaneousmanifestations ofanti - americanism . 'there is something slightly alarming in russia's new , more hard - line stance toward the united states over iraq," observed the moscow times editorial page on february 27 . "president vladimir putin changed the tone ... when hewarned of the dangers of u.s.and british warmongering and called on the military to be ready to defend russia's interests .