construction is expected to begin in 2007 . ( see figure 1 . ) for fy2007 , the administration has requested a total of $48 million for the project: $35 million through the corps and $13.3 million through the doi . the house - passed interior and energy and water appropriations bills , and the senate - reported interior appropriations bill , provide the requested amount of funding for mod waters for fy2007 . the senate - reported energy and water bill , however , provides no funding for mod waters ( for the corps ) for fy2007 and limits funds to $35 million for the corps to construct this project . this provision would include â§104 , which authorizes mod waters , though it primarily authorizes activities carried out by the corps . arguments used to argue against corps authorization to fund mod waters could cite the long history of transfers from the nps to the corps , which could be argued to establish a strong precedent for the lack of corps authority . due to these conflicting arguments and the lack of clear legislative intent , the authority for the corps to directly fund mod waters might still remain debatable . in the fy2007 energy and water appropriations debate , the senate energy and water appropriations committee has not provided funds to the corps for mod waters . rising project costs for mod waters has led some critics to question its viability . the original cost of completing mod waters was estimated at $81.3 million in 1990 . the current estimated cost for completing the project is $398 million . to date , approximately $252 million has been appropriated for constructing and implementing mod waters , and $146 million more is estimated to be needed to finish the project ( i.e. some contend that changes in the implementation plan , the rising cost of land acquisition , and flood mitigation requirements have led to higher costs . this was reflected , according to some , in the changes in the 1992 general design memorandum , which were derived from updated modeling data and the project's need to be compatible with cerp . mod waters was originally estimated to be completed by 1997 , yet now some argue it is unclear as to when or even whether the project will be completed . the fy2006 administration request indicates that funding will be requested through fy2009 . some contend that delays are due to the undefined roles of doi and the corps in implementing the project , a lack of a unified approach to restoration , redesigning the project , and litigation regarding the 8.5 sma and tamiami trail portion of the project . some argue that the delay in implementing mod waters jeopardizes implementation of cerp projects , causes further degradation within everglades national park , and will set a precedent for delays and deliberation regarding land acquisition activities when cerp projects are being implemented . to help implement mod waters , congress included a provision in the consolidated appropriations resolution for fy2003 ( division f , title i , â§157 of p.l . 108-7 ) that authorizes the corps to implement a flood protection plan ( alternative 6d ) for the 8.5 sma as part of mod waters .