u.s. census bureau . statistical abstract of the united states 2007 . washington: gpo , 2006 . u.s. department of commerce , national oceanic and atmospheric administration . the coastline of the united states , 1975 . van zandt , franklin k. boundaries of the united states and the several states . washington: gpo , 1976 . geological survey professional paper 909 . the world almanac and book of facts 2007 . international boundary and water commission ( ibwc ) united states and mexico http: / / www.ibwc.state.gov this website has historical information on the two treaties — the guadalupe hidalgo treaty of february 2,1848 , and the treaty of december 30 , 1853 — between the united states and mexico that set the international boundary between the two countries . the figures for alaska reflect a 1961 remeasurement . it is important to note that boundary and coastline distances can differ significantly based on the scale used on the maps or charts . the canadian and mexican international borders are less problematic than the coastline measures because there are long stretches that are straight , such as the nearly 900-mile section of the u.s. - canadian border along the 49 th parallel . coastline measurements are more difficult because of the effects of tides and the necessarily arbitrary decisions that must be made about measuring bays , coves , islands , and inlets leading to streams and rivers . the "general coastline" data in this report are based on large scale nautical charts , resulting in a coastline measure for the 50 states totaling12,383 miles . another measure using smaller scale nautical charts more than doubles this measurement to 29,093 miles , while the figures used by the noaa in administering the coastal zone management program ( 16 u.s.c . §1451 ) come to 88,612 miles ( not including the great lakes ) . table 3 provides figures for the areas of the u.s. coastline bordering international waters . it measures the coastline of the contiguous states from northeast to northwest . similar to problems mentioned above regarding measuring coastlines , variations in shoreline figures appear due to natural occurrences , including bays and inlets , and in differing methods of measurement . these shoreline lengths were measured in 1970 by the international coordinating committee on the great lakes basic hydraulic and hydrologic data . crs report rs22026 , border security: the san diego fence , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33659 , border security: barriers along the u.s. international border , by [author name scrubbed] and yule kim.crs report rl33353 , civilian patrols along the border: legal and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs22443 , border security and military support: legal authorizations and restrictions , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33106 , border security and the southwest border: background , legislation , and issues , by lisa m. seghetti et al.. crs report rl31826 , protecting the u.s. perimeter: " border searches " under the fourth amendment , by yule kim . crs report rl32399 , border security: inspections practices , policies , and issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al.