a project can be resubmitted to the nsb the following year . the director submits his selections to the nsb for project approval . after the nsb approves a project for future budget cycle funding , it prioritizes among the projects . such decisions will be difficult to make , in part because of the number of stakeholders and interested parties , and will require extensive community consultation and input , which may come from "blue ribbon" panels , national academies committees and professional societies . in some cases in which a facility can continue to be productive , it may be possible to transfer ownership to another agency , a university or a consortium of universities . it is the responsibility of the directorate and divisions to periodically review their facilities portfolio and to consider which facilities may have reached an appropriate end of nsf support . the mrefc supports the acquisition and construction of major research facilities and equipment that extend the boundaries of science , engineering , and technology . the major research equipment and facilities construction ( mrefc ) account receives $196.2 million in the fy2013 budget request , slightly below the fy2012 estimated level of $197.1 million . according to nsf , it is the primary federal agency providing support for forefront instrumentation and facilities for the academic research and education communities . the future success of entire fields of research depends upon access to new generations of powerful research tools . in every large facility project , the nsf program manager , with the support of the participating division director , has primary responsibility for all aspects of management . in addition , the nsf program manager is responsible for determining whether the project director and project management staff have the necessary training and skills for working on the project . the rare symmetry violating processes project ( rsvp ) was initially nsb - approved for funding in october 2000 , and was included in the fy2005 budget request as a new construction project . while the rsvp was in the design phase , an analysis revealed that there could be significant increases in construction and operating costs . the cost overruns generated interest from congress and the international scientific community . an evaluation was conducted by scientific personnel internal and external to nsf in an attempt to resolve the cost increases in various elements of the project . in august 2005 , on the recommendation from nsf management , the nsb terminated the rsvp . nsf determined that continued support for the rsvp would cause "unacceptable loss of research opportunities in elementary particle physics and other areas of science. the rsvp underwent a series of phase - out activities . the march 2011 large facilities manual includes a discussion of termination of a large facility . language included in the report states that to remain at the research frontier and support new facilities , nsf should retire existing facilities when the science they enable is of lower strategic priority than science that could be enabled by alternate use of the funds . nsf states that "modern and effective research infrastructure is critical to maintaining u.s. leadership in science and engineering .