international child abduction is not new . however , one can argue that incidents of child abduction continue to increase due to the ease of international travel as well as an increase in bicultural marriages . parental child abduction across international boundaries often garners global attention and demands for international solutions . since 1988 , the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction ( "hague convention" or "convention" ) has been the principal mechanism for enforcing the return of abducted children to the united states . the signatory nations are anguilla , argentina , australia , austria , the bahamas , belgium , belize , bermuda , bosnia - herzegovina , brazil , bulgaria , burkina faso , canada , the cayman islands , chile , colombia , costa rica , croatia , czech republic , cyprus , denmark , dominican republic , ecuador , el salvador , estonia , the falkland islands , finland , france , germany , greece , guatemala , honduras , the hong kong special administrative region , hungary , iceland , ireland , the isle of man , israel , italy , latvia , lithuania , luxembourg , macau , former yugoslav republic of macedonia , malta , mauritius , mexico , monaco , montenegro , montserrat , morocco , the netherlands , new zealand , norway , panama , paraguay , peru , poland , portugal , romania , san marino , serbia , singapore , slovakia , slovenia , south africa , spain , st. kitts and nevis , sri lanka , sweden , switzerland , trinidad and tobago , turkey , ukraine , the united kingdom , uruguay , the united states , venezuela , and zimbabwe . the hague convention does not act as an extradition treaty , nor does it purport to adjudicate the merits of a custody dispute . it merely provides a civil remedy designed to preserve the status quo by returning an abducted child to the country of his or her "habitual residence" and allowing the judicial authorities in that country to adjudicate the merits of a custody dispute . as such , the proceeding is brought in the country to which the child was abducted or in which the child is retained . although domestic relations involve issues typically governed by state law , the federal statute implementing the hague convention explicitly confers jurisdiction on the federal courts . law enforcement in the united states historically viewed parental kidnapping as a private family matter that did not require outside involvement . this belief has changed , resulting in the enactment of several laws that recognize the seriousness and criminality of parental kidnappings . presently , law enforcement agents with arrest warrants seek out parents who have violated a custody decree by taking a child out of the state or country . difficulties arise when parents take children out of the country because foreign courts have no obligation to enforce american custody decrees or abide by american laws . even though the united states has difficulty enforcing parental kidnapping laws abroad , these laws can act as useful mechanisms to facilitate solutions to international child abductions .