the economist . "those awkward hearts and minds. april 1 , 2003 . the german marshall fund of the united states . has the war in iraq helped or hurt the war on terrorism ? - - 36% said it helped , 50% said ithurt , and 5% said it had no effect . ( a different poll taken around the same time showed that 67% said the war iniraqincreased the threat of terrorism , 9% said it decreased the threat , and 21% said it had noeffect. ) ( 3 ) who could do the best job at helping the iraqi people form a stable government , the u.s. and its allies or the united nations ? - - 10% said the u.s. and its allies , 82% said the u.n. , 4% said both , and 2%saidneither . italy contributes the third largest national contingent of troops to iraq , with nearly 3,000 military and paramilitarytroops serving in the u.k. - led multinational division in the south . following the spanish parliamentary electionsinmarch 2004 , the conservative italian government under prime minister silvio berlusconi pledged to keep italiantroops in iraq . berlusconi also expressed steadfast support for the italian military role in iraq after a november 2003suicide bomb attack on coalition forces in iraq killed nearly 20 italian troops , the largest single number of italianmilitary casualties since world war ii . in contrast , italian center - left opposition party leaders have recently saidthatthey would support an end to italy's military role in iraq . ( 4 ) in april 2003 , the italian public seemed split on the war in iraq . according to one poll , 55% disapproved of the war,compared with 42% who expressed support . at the same time , 55% approved of the italian government's decisiontoopen italian bases and airspace to coalition forces . ( 5 ) italian polls through the rest of 2003 and early 2004 showed a consistently even split in italian public opinion betweenthose in favor of or against withdrawing italian troops from iraq , with a slightly greater percentage in favor ofwithdrawal . however , polls taken after the november 2003 suicide attacks against italian personnel in iraqsuggesteda growing resolve to see through italy's commitment to iraqi stabilization rather than pull out . ( 6 ) spain's announcement after the march 11 madrid attacks that it would withdraw its troops from iraq has appeared toinfluence public opinion in italy . in a mid - march poll that asked , do you favor or oppose a decision similartospain's to withdraw troops by june 30 ? , 67% said they were in favor versus 26% opposed . ( 7 ) a february 2004 poll from ap / ipsos showed results in italy similar to those in britain on a few related questions,including: in response to the question , has the military action in iraq increased , decreased , or had no effect on the threat of terrorism ? - - 65% said it increased the threat , 6% said it decreased the threat , 20% saidit hadno effect , and 9% said they were unsure . poland has commanded a multinational peacekeeping division in central iraq since late summer 2003 and contributesabout 2,500 troops to the peacekeeping operation .