they were not decisive during the 1980s . they appear to have been operative during the 1990s . with the onset of the recession in 2001 and subsequent move to expansion , the coincident shift back to budget deficit , the two deficits began to move together again . is this evidence inconsistent with theory ? the analysis will suggest that the answer is no . there are other forces besides the federal budget deficit that can influence the u.s. trade deficit . mainstream macroeconomic theory explains the twin deficit phenomenon as follows . an increase in the federal budget deficit ( measured as an increase in the structural deficit as a percent of full employment gdp ) will— all else held constant both in the united states and abroad —put upward pressure on u.s. interest rates , raising them above comparable rates abroad . this occurs because the position of the government's budget influences the national saving rate . when the structural budget deficit shrinks , the government adds to the national saving supplied by households and businesses and interest rates fall . when the structural budget deficit grows , it represents a claim on those savings , and interest rates must rise for the market to remain in equilibrium . in a world in which u.s. assets are good substitutes for foreign assets , foreign investors will be tempted to buy more of the now higher yielding american assets . before they can buy these assets , they must first purchase dollars . thus , the net demand for dollars in the foreign exchange market rises and the dollar increases in value and it is said to appreciate . dollar appreciation reduces the price of foreign goods and services in america and increases the price of american goods and services abroad . the net result is that americans spend more on foreign goods and services ( the value of american imports rise ) and foreigners spend less on american goods and services ( the value of u.s. exports fall ) . if the trade accounts were in balance to begin with , the united states now has a trade deficit . and , indeed , the data during the 1980s , shown on table 1 , conform to what the theory predicts . the full employment or structural deficit rose from 0.6% of full employment gdp in 1981 to an expansion high of 4.8% in 1986 , a rise of 4.2 percentage points . the trade balance rose over this period from a surplus of 0.2% of gdp to a deficit of 2.5% of gdp , a rise of 2.7 percentage points ( thus , the rise in the trade deficit was about 59% of the rise in the structural budget deficit ) . further , as the structural budget deficit fell from 4.7% of gdp in 1986 to 2.2% in 1989 , the last full year of the 1982-1990 economic expansion , a fall of 2.5 percentage points , the trade deficit fell from 2.5% , of gdp to 1.1% of gdp , a fall of 1.4 percentage points ( or about 56% of the decline in the structural budget deficit ) .