the bush administration has made substantial efforts to prepare for a political transition in cuba . the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-114 ) sets forth a number of conditions for the suspension of the embargo , including that a transition cuban government: does not include fidel or raúl castro ; has legalized all political activity ; has released all political prisoners ; and is making progress in establishing an independent judiciary and in respecting internationally recognized human rights . the actual termination of the embargo would require additional conditions , including that an elected civilian government is in power . the dilemma for u.s. policy is that the legislative conditions could keep the united states from having any leverage or influence as events unfold in a post - fidel cuba and as cuba moves toward a post - raúl cuba . in 2004 and 2006 , the administration's commission for assistance to a free cuba prepared two reports detailing how the united states could provide support to a cuban transition government to help it respond to humanitarian needs , conduct free and fair elections , and move toward a market - based economy . a criticism of the reports , however , has been that they presuppose that cuba will undergo a rapid democratic transition , and do not entertain the possibility of reform or economic change under a communist government . other supporters of current policy maintain that easing economic sanctions would prolong the communist regime by increasing money flowing into its state - controlled enterprises , while continued sanctions would keep up the pressure to enact deeper economic reforms . those advocating an easing of sanctions argue that the united states needs to take advantage of cuba's political succession to abandon its long - standing sanctions - based policy that they maintain has had no practical effect in changing the policies of the cuban government . he said that "we are willing to resolve at the negotiating table the longstanding dispute between the united states and cuba , of course , provided they accept , as we have previously said , our condition as a country that will not tolerate any blemishes on its independence , and as long as said resolution is based on the principles of equality , reciprocity , non - interference , and mutual respect. since assuming power , raúl castro has made several public offers to engage in dialogue with the united states that have been rebuffed by u.s. officials who maintain that change in cuba must precede a change in u.s. policy . in an august 2006 interview , raúl asserted that cuba has "always been disposed to normalize relations on an equal plane," but at the same time he expressed strong opposition to current u.s. policy toward cuba , which he described as "arrogant and interventionist. in response , assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs thomas shannon reiterated a u.s. offer to cuba , first articulated by president bush in may 2002 , that the administration was willing to work with congress to lift u.s. economic sanctions if cuba were to begin a political opening and a transition to democracy .