the court pointed to numerous similarities between the facts presented in raich and those in wickard . initially , the court noted that because the commodities being cultivated in both cases are fungible and that well - established interstate markets exist , both markets are susceptible to fluctuations in supply and demand based on production intended for home - consumption being introduced into the national market . according to the court , just as there was no difference between the wheat mr. wickard produced for personal consumption and the wheat cultivated for sale on the open market , there is no discernable difference between personal home - grown medicinal marijuana and marijuana grown for the express purpose of being sold in the interstate market . thus , the court concluded that congress had a rational basis for concluding that "leaving home - consumed marijuana outside federal control would similarly affect price and market conditions. respondents argued that wickard was distinguishable because in the case of wheat the activity involved was purely commercial , and the evidence clearly established that the aggregate production of wheat had a significant effect on the interstate market . conversely , respondents claimed that the activity at issue in raich is non - commercial—the respondents had never attempted to sell their marijuana—and congress had made no finding that the personal cultivation and use of medicinal marijuana has a substantial effect on the interstate marijuana market . the court , however , noted that the standard for assessing the scope of congress's power under the commerce clause , is not whether the activity at issue , when aggregated , substantially affects interstate commerce ; but rather , whether there exists a "rational basis" for congress to have concluded as such . the court , applying this deferential standard , concluded that "congress had a rational basis for believing that failure to regulate the intrastate manufacture and possession of marijuana would leave a gaping hole in the csa. moreover , the court affirmed that "congress was acting well within its authority to 'make all laws which shall be necessary and proper' to 'regulate commerce ... among the several states.' despite having concluded that under the "rational basis test" congress had acted within its constitutional authority when it enacted the csa and applied it to intrastate possession of marijuana , the court nevertheless had to distinguish lopez and morrison , the court's more recent commerce clause decisions . the court concluded that the csa , unlike the statutes in either lopez ( gun free school zones act ) or morrison ( violence against women act ) , regulated activity that is "quintessentially economic," therefore , neither lopez or morrison cast any doubts on the constitutionality of the statute . wickard stands for the proposition that congress can rationally combine the effects that an individual producer has on an interstate market to find substantial impacts on interstate commerce .