oil might not be available to all who need it . this would have implications for the rest of the economy , as transportation costs increase and cause price increases for goods across the economy . also , many u.s. businesses rely on imports , both for intermediate goods and consumer products . it is difficult to determine which individual products could be in short supply , because many consumer goods that are generally not considered imported products depend on imports at some stage of their production . also , some consumer goods that are imported have substitutes that may be produced in the united states . finally , trade disruptions would account for only part of the economic impact of an avian flu pandemic . other domestic and international economic events could have more severe impacts , which could be compounded by disruptions in global trade . governments may nationalize assets and stop export operations . an outbreak may also constrain production and key export infrastructure through excessive worker absences , to the point where exporting becomes difficult and is involuntarily slowed or halted . such a slowdown in commerce could cause price increases or temporary shortages in certain goods within the united states , depending on the duration and breadth of the slowdown . it could exacerbate the effects of slowed production and distribution networks within the united states , leading to decreased demand and supply and a recession . several studies have been undertaken to estimate the effects of a pandemic on the u.s. and global economy . according to one study , a mild pandemic could reduce global economic output by $330 billion , or 0.8% of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) . the same study estimates that a pandemic of the worst case scenario severity could reduce global economic output by $4.4 trillion , or 12.6% of global gdp . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that a severe influenza pandemic might cause a decline in u.s. gdp of about 4.25% , and that a milder pandemic might cause a decline of about 1% . other studies have found both greater and lesser economic effects , depending on the methodology and data used . different studies also disagree on the extent to which international trade would be disrupted by an avian flu pandemic . this section considers the potential economic and trade effects on the united states of import disruptions from countries affected by avian flu , either as a result of border closings in the united states or supply side constraints in the exporting country or region . only countries with human avian flu cases confirmed by the world health organization ( who ) from january 2004 to january 2008 are considered , because these countries are arguably more likely to experience trade disruptions due to avian flu . the relative likelihood of import disruptions from one country or region over another is not considered , because it is too difficult to ascertain . as seen in table 1 , the united states imports far more from china than any other country that has thus far reported confirmed human cases of the avian flu .