in its report for fy2005 ( s.rept . 108-280 ) , the senate appropriations committee stated that the program is appropriately run within fema , and that it would not move it to hud as the president requested . the president's fy2006 budget request left the efs program within the department of homeland security's office of emergency preparedness and response , also known as fema . these guidelines are published in the federal register . the national board distributes funds directly to eligible local jurisdictions , which then determine how to allocate the funds among local service providers . local jurisdictions must fulfill two requirements to be considered eligible . first , they must either be cities of 50,000 or more or counties ( typically local jurisdictions are counties ) . second , they must have the highest need for emergency food and shelter as determined by unemployment and poverty rates . specifically , the national board uses three measures to determine which local jurisdictions have the highest need: those with 13,000 or more residents unemployed and an unemployment rate of at least 4.7% ; those with between 300 and 12,999 residents unemployed and an unemployment rate of at least 6.7% ; or those with 300 or more unemployed and a poverty rate of at least 11% . once the national board determines which local jurisdictions are eligible to receive funds , it calculates the amount of funds each will receive by dividing the amount of available funds by the number of unemployed within all eligible local jurisdictions combined to arrive at a per capita rate of funding per unemployed person . it then distributes the funds by multiplying the per capita rate by the number of unemployed persons in each eligible local jurisdiction . local jurisdictions that do not qualify for funding under one of the three measures of unemployment and poverty ( sometimes referred to as direct funding ) may still receive funds through a state set - aside process . the national board reserves a portion of appropriated funds so that states may either fund local jurisdictions that otherwise do not qualify for funds , or provide additional funds to jurisdictions that have already qualified . in determining the portion of state set - aside funds to allocate from the total , the national board uses its discretion , although it attempts to minimize fluctuations in funding from year to year and maintain a constant ratio of per capita state set - aside funding to per capita direct funding . the state set - aside allows states to address pockets of homelessness or poverty , help areas that undergo economic changes like plant closings , or assist communities where levels of unemployment or poverty do not quite rise to the required threshold . each state has a set - aside committee that develops its own criteria to determine which local jurisdictions will receive set - aside funds , however the committees must give priority to those jurisdictions that did not receive funding based on unemployment and poverty measures . the national board allocates the state set - aside funds based on a ratio of each state's average number of unemployed individuals in unfunded jurisdictions to the average number of unemployed in unfunded jurisdictions nationwide .