satellites. threat consists of capabilities and intentions , stressed the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , general peter pace , at a news conference on march 7 , 2007 . he visited china on march 22-26 , and reported that the intention of the asat test remained unclear . china has not explained how it intends to use this asat weapon that has been tested . various comments by pla officers and prc civilian analysts have justified the asat test as needed to counter perceived u.s. "hegemony" in space and target the vulnerability of u.s. dependence on satellites . a pla air force colonel wrote in late 2006 that u.s. military power , including long - range strikes , have relied on superiority in space and that leveraging space technology can allow a rising power to close the gap with advanced countries more rapidly than trying to catch up . a prc specialist at fudan university indicated that china's asat program is developed partly to maintain china's nuclear deterrence , perceived as undermined by u.s. space assets . an analyst at the pla's academy of military science argued that china does not have a clear space deterrence theory and that china likely seeks a limited capability to counter u.s. dominance in space and reduce the likelihood of u.s. attacks against space assets . some news reports speculated that this asat test surprised u.s. intelligence . although china's test confirmed long - standing defense department reporting about china's counter - space program , some warnings seemed inconsistent with china's january 2007 kinetic kill asat test . in the three annual reports on the pla from 2004 to 2006 ( required by the fy2000 national defense authorization act ) , the secretary of defense reported to congress that china could destroy or disable satellites in space "only" by launching a ballistic missile or space launch vehicle "armed with a nuclear weapon. however , the pentagon's 2003 report warned that china was developing a "direct - ascent asat system" that could be fielded between 2005 and 2010 . also , u.s. intelligence reportedly knew about the pla's previous tests and preparations for this latest asat test . a number of u.s. intelligence agencies had a "full court press underway" to monitor the asat test on january 11 , and it was the fourth test that the united states monitored using missile - warning satellites . china conducted three previous tests in this weapon program between september 2004 and february 2006 , according to a u.s. official . despite foreign protests , china did not issue an official statement until january 23 , 12 days after the asat test . china's foreign ministry simply stated that its "experiment" did not target or threaten any country and that china opposes the weaponization of space or an arms race in space . beijing's lack of a prepared explanation and delay in issuing a statement raised questions about whether the top leaders approved the pla's asat tests , coordinated between the foreign ministry and the pla , miscalculated foreign responses , or approved the asat program and anticipated criticisms but decided anyway to test . adding to concerns about china's intentions , the asat test did not come at a time of bilateral tensions .