ilves was born in the united states . after estonia regained its independence in 1991 , he moved to estonia , and later served as ambassador to the united states and foreign minister . in these posts he became known as an outspoken defender of estonia's interests , especially against russian encroachment . in addition , at least part of the russian - speaking population suffers from higher unemployment and lower living standards than ethnic estonians do , due to a variety of factors , including inability to speak estonian , which is required by estonian law for many jobs . russia has also expressed irritation at nato's role in patrolling the airspace of estonia and the other two baltic states , and estonia's failure to join the conventional forces in europe ( cfe ) treaty . the role of estonia in the transit of russian oil through its ports , once key to estonia's economy , may be reduced by the decision by the russian government - controlled transneft oil transit company to expand the use of its own port facilities at primorsk in russia . estonia is heavily dependent on russia for oil and natural gas supplies . estonia and other states in central europe have expressed concern about the nord stream natural gas pipeline which , when completed , will link germany directly with russia via the baltic sea floor . in addition to environmental concerns , they fear russia will gain additional political and economic leverage over the region once russia has an alternative to key energy infrastructure that runs through their territories . russo - estonian relations deteriorated sharply in april 2007 , when estonia moved "the bronze soldier," a world war ii - era statue of a soviet soldier from a park in the capital , tallinn , to another location , along with the bodies of red army soldiers buried nearby . the move provoked a furious reaction among some ethnic russians in estonia , and from russian government leaders , who viewed the action as dishonoring red army soldiers who liberated estonia from the nazis . for their part , many estonians see the "liberation" as the exchange of nazi domination for a soviet one , and not worthy of prominent commemoration . in addition to harsh verbal attacks from moscow , harassment of estonia's ambassador to moscow by youth groups with close ties to the kremlin , and violent demonstrations by hundreds of ethnic russians in estonia , estonia's internet infrastructure came under heavy attack from hackers in late april and early may . estonian officials said some assaults came from russian government web servers , although many others came from all over the world . these cyberattacks were particularly damaging to estonia , which has integrated the internet into public life perhaps more than almost any country in the world . estonia has asked for russia's cooperation in investigating the origin of the cyberattacks . the russian government has denied involvement in the attacks . at the invitation of the estonian government , nato cyber experts visited estonia in the wake of the attacks to assess their scope and discuss with their estonian counterparts how to deal with possible future attacks .