firm ? ; b ) how should national security be defined ? ; and c ) which types of economic activities should be targeted for a cfius review ? some members also perceive greater risks to the economy arising from foreign investments by firms that are owned or controlled by foreign governments as a result of the terrorist attacks . the dubai ports world case , in particular , demonstrated that there was a difference between the post - september 11 , 2001 , expectations held by many in congress about the role of foreign investment in the economy and of economic infrastructure issues as a component of national security . for some members of congress , cfius seemed to be out of touch with the post - september 11 , 2001 , view of national security , because it remained founded in the late 1980s orientation of the exon - florio provision , which viewed national security primarily in terms of national defense and downplayed or even excluded a broader notion of economic national security . these and other concerns about foreign investment underscore the significant differences that remained between congress and the bush administration over the operations of cfius and over the economic and security objectives the committee should be pursuing . in early 2011 , some members of congress had requested that the obama administration support a recommendation by cfius that the president block a proposed acquisition of 3leaf systems by huawei technologies over national security concerns . instead , huawei discontinued its efforts to acquire the u.s. firm . on june 20 , 2011 , the obama administration issued a formal statement on foreign investment declaring the countries' commitment to an open investment policy . the proposed acquisition of p&o by dubai ports world sparked a broader set of concerns and a wide - ranging discussion between congress and the administration over a working set of parameters that establishes a functional definition of the national economic security implications of foreign direct investment . in part , this issue reflects differing assessments of the economic impact of foreign investment on the u.s. economy and differing political and philosophical convictions among members and between the congress and various administrations . ralls has appealed the case . in addition , china's wanxiang group received approval in january 2013 from cfius to acquire electric car battery maker a123 systems . wanxiang outbid other potential buyers by offering to pay $257 million for the u.s. company . some members of congress and the strategic materials advisory council argued against the acquisitions on the grounds that it could jeopardize the nation's energy security . others opposed the acquisition because a123 systems had received nearly $250 million in a federal grant to support clean energy , although half of the grant was never released . a123 systems manufactures lithium - ion batteries for fisker automotive , bmw hybrid 3- and 5-series cars , and the all - electric chevrolet spark . arguably , the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and a dissatisfaction among some members over a perceived lack of responsiveness by the administration reshaped congressional attitudes toward the exon - florio provision .