, report ) . it contains information that is also on each employee's w - 4 form . employers are required by p.l . 104-193 to send new hire reports to the state directory of new hires , which then sends the required information to the ndnh . states also are required to send quarterly wage information of existing employees ( in uc - covered employment ) and unemployment compensation claims information to the ndnh . federal employers ( i.e. , agencies ) send their new hire reports and quarterly wage information directly to the ndnh . a new hire report contains six data elements on new employees , which include the name , address , and social security number of each new employee and the employer's name , address , and tax identification number . the ndnh contains three components . ( 1 ) the first component of the ndnh is the new hires file ( i.e. ( 2 ) the second component of the ndnh is the quarterly wage file . the quarterly wage file contains quarterly wage information on individual employees in uc - covered employment . this information comes from the records of the state workforce agencies ( sometimes called state employment security agencies ) and the federal government . when an individual has more than one job , separate quarterly wage records are established for each job . ( 3 ) the third component of the ndnh is the unemployment compensation file . the unemployment compensation file contains information pertaining to persons who have received or applied for unemployment compensation , as reported by state workforce agencies . with respect to this file , the state can only submit information that is already contained in the records of the state agency ( i.e. , generally the state workforce agency ) that administers the unemployment compensation program . thus , the ndnh obtains its data from state directories of new hires , state workforce agencies , and federal agencies . the ndnh , itself , is a component of the federal parent locator service ( fpls ) , which is maintained by the federal office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) and is housed at the social security administration's national computer center in baltimore , md . according to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , during fy2010 about 672 million records were posted to the ndnh . employers are required to collect from each newly hired employee and transmit to the state directory of new hires a report that contains the name , address , and social security number of the employee and the employer's name , address , and tax identification number . most states require only these six basic data elements in each new hires report ; some states require or request additional information . the state directory of new hires is required to submit its new hire reports to the ndnh . employers must provide a new hires report on each newly hired employee to the state directory of new hires generally within 20 days after the employee is hired . the new hires report must be entered into the database maintained by the state directory of new hires within five business days of receipt from an employer .