china online . http: / / chinaculture.about.com / library / china / whitepaper / blstrade2.htm . the u.s. - china bilateral trade balance: its size and determinants . sarah y. tong . volume 3 , no . 1 , pp . march 2005 . august 2013 . office of economics research note , u.s. international trade commission , no . rn - 2013-08a . report on the statistical discrepancy of merchandise trade between the united states and china , report by the joint commission on commerce and trade statistical working group , october 2009 . the second phase report on the statistical discrepancy of merchandise trade between the united states and china , report by the joint commission on commerce and trade statistical working group , december 2012 . statistical differences in sino - us trade balance . february 12 , 2007 . robert c. feenstra , wen hai , wing t. woo , and shunli yao . may 1998 . paper presented at the undp - hiid conference on china's integration in the global economy , january 17 , 1998 . the u.s. - china trade imbalance: how big is it really ? china: an international journal . june 2006 . stanford center for international development , working paper no . comparing canada's and china's bilateral trade data . china - canada joint working group on trade statistics reconciliation . august 29 , 2018 . methodology of u.s. - china - hong kong triangular merchandise trade statistic reconciliation . alexander hammer , lin jones , and zhi wang . the main conclusions of the two studies are largely the same . the greatest discrepancy is in the "eastbound trade" data , which accounts for 80% - 90% of the overall difference in annual trade balance . roughly half of the "eastbound trade" data discrepancy can be attributed to goods that "leave china , enter the commerce of intermediate countries or regions , and then [are] re - exported to the united states. the release of the official u.s. annual trade figures has been frequently followed by expressions of concern about the size of u.s. bilateral trade deficit with china . according to official u.s. trade figures , the bilateral trade deficit with china in 2017 was more than five times the size of the next largest bilateral trade deficit ( mexico , $71.1 billion ) and greater than the sum of the next eight largest bilateral trade deficits . china has not accepted the "accuracy" of the official u.s. figure for the sino - u.s. trade balance for at least two decades . a 1997 white paper issued by china's state council , "on sino - us trade balance," states , "statistics and analyses prove it true that sino - us trade has been in favour of china in recent years , but it is obvious that the size of the us deficit has been largely exaggerated by the us side. in 2007 , china's foreign ministry spokeswoman , jiang yu , said , "imbalances in china - u.s. trade are an objective fact , but this is also related to the two sides' different statistical methods.