additional discussion appears below . first , in 1995 , a dispute emerged over the nomination of james l. dennis , a louisianan nominated to a fifth circuit seat previously occupied by mississippian charles clark . dennis was eventually confirmed by the senate . second , some senators publicly objected to the nominations of claude allen to a vacancy on the fourth circuit due to state representation grounds . allen , from virginia , was first nominated to the court in 2003 after the death of judge francis murnaghan of maryland . allen's nomination was eventually returned to the president at the end of the 108 th congress without senate approval . judge davis was confirmed on november 9 , 2009 . additionally , according to media accounts , the 2006 vacancy created by the resignation of fourth circuit judge michael luttig , of virginia , prompted senators from virginia and north carolina to advocate nominees from their respective states . in may 2008 , g. steven agee , of virginia , was confirmed to fill this position , failing to result in a change in state representation . the nomination of norman randy smith to the ninth circuit also proved to be controversial . in december 2005 , president george w. bush nominated smith , of idaho , to a ninth circuit seat . california senator dianne feinstein publicly objected to the nomination , stating that smith's confirmation would result in a "transfer of a judgeship from california to idaho. senator barbara boxer , also from california , and other senators also objected to the nomination . by contrast , idaho senators larry craig and michael crapo , and others , contended that smith should be confirmed to the seat because its previous occupant , judge stephen s. trott , maintained chambers in idaho , and because judges from various states had previously held the seat . at the beginning of the 110 th congress , president bush renominated smith to fill judge trott's vacancy , but later withdrew that nomination and renominated smith to replace judge thomas nelson , who had taken senior status . nelson was originally nominated from idaho . the senate confirmed smith on february 15 , 2007 , to the seat vacated by nelson . in the 111 th congress , the confirmation of albert diaz to the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit resulted in a change in state representation , moving a seat from south carolina to north carolina . third , some circuits have experienced greater changes in state representation than others . one explanation for the latter two patterns might be a practice of rotating seats among smaller states , particularly before a federal statute required that each state be represented on its circuit court and before congress created enough judgeships within each circuit to allow each state to be represented at the same time . the court of appeals for the first circuit , for example , covers the states of maine , massachusetts , new hampshire , and rhode island . until 1978 , the court had only three authorized judges , so not all of the states could be represented on the court simultaneously .