there is no simple definition of the term "discriminatory. instead , the supreme court has provided general principles , which are then applied to the specific tax at issue . for example , the court has declared that a "fundamental principle" of the commerce clause is that states may not "impose a tax which discriminates against interstate commerce...by providing a direct commercial advantage to local business. this restriction is founded in what is referred to as the dormant commerce clause . a state tax provision does not violate the dormant commerce clause if four qualifications are met: ( 1 ) the activity taxed has a substantial nexus with the state , ( 2 ) the tax is fairly apportioned to reflect the degree of activity that occurs within the state , ( 3 ) the tax does not discriminate against interstate commerce , and ( 4 ) the tax is fairly related to benefits provided by the state . in the cuno case , the only issue with respect to the commerce clause was whether the tax incentive was discriminatory . as shown by the opposite outcomes of the two lower courts ( discussed below ) , it is possible to come to different conclusions about the meaning of the supreme court's prior cases . the decisions by the district court and court of appeals broadly represent two viewpoints of the court's jurisprudence . the district court's decision represents the idea that the purpose of the commerce clause is to prevent economic protectionism by the states ( i.e. , to prevent states from helping in - state businesses by penalizing out - of - state businesses ) . the court of appeals' decision represents the view that the clause's purpose is to encourage free trade by limiting the state's ability to use its taxing power to coerce taxpayers into conducting business in that state . as seen in the two opinions , there is support in the supreme court's prior decisions for both interpretations . the supreme court , in holding that the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring suit in federal court , did not address whether the tax credit violated the commerce clause . the economic development act of 2005 ( h.r . 2471 and s. 1066 ) would give states the authority to offer incentives like the investment tax credit struck down by the sixth circuit in cuno . the act would generally allow the states to provide discriminatory tax incentives that are for an economic development purpose , including any legally permitted activity for attracting , retaining , or expanding business activity , jobs , or investment in a state . some incentives would not be allowed , including those that depend on state of incorporation or domicile , require the recipient to acquire or use services or property produced in the state , are reduced as a direct result of an increase in out - of - state activity , result in a loss of a compensating tax system , require reciprocalâ tax benefits from another jurisdiction , or reduce a tax not imposed on apportioned interstate activities . the act would apply to all qualifying tax incentives , regardless of their date of enactment .