soledad in california . the current cross was placed on then - city owned property in 1954 , although other versions of the cross have been located in the same place since 1913 . the federal government seized the land upon which the cross stands by eminent domain in 2006 "in order to preserve a historically significant war memorial. in january 2011 , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit held that the federal government's actions with regard to the mt . soledad cross may have had a secular purpose ( that is , preserving a memorial for veterans of the nation's armed forces ) , but the effect of displaying the large latin cross on public land indicated a religious message of endorsement of one religion and the exclusion of others . the court evaluated the case under both the lemon test ( used in mccreary ) and the principles provided by van orden , finding the cross unconstitutional in each examination . specifically , the court explained that the cross symbolized christianity exclusively , was rarely originally designated as a war memorial generally , and had a long religious history but scarce secular history . the court repeatedly emphasized the significance of the setting of the cross within the memorial , noting that the cross was the central and dominant feature of the mt . soledad memorial and was the only element visible from many perspectives . the court noted the guidance of the supreme court's buono decision — that the context of the memorial was a critical element of analysis — and used the relative size and dominance of the cross as it currently stands as justification for finding a violation of the establishment clause . displays of the ten commandments have been the most frequent type of display to be challenged . however , public displays of other religious symbols have also been challenged under the establishment clause . in the 1980s , the court decided two cases involving religious symbols on public property that were included in christmas holiday displays . like the mccreary and van orden decisions , the court decided the constitutionality of the inclusion of a creche in two separate holiday displays with varying results . the court's decisions relied on the setting of each display , particularly whether the display emphasized the religious nature of the symbol or the secular purpose of its inclusion . in lynch v. donnelly , the court held that the inclusion of a creche in a city's christmas display did not violate the establishment clause . applying the lemon test , the court reasoned that the creche had a legitimate secular purpose in recognizing "the historical origins of this traditional event long recognized as a national holiday. the display did not advance religion , according to the court , because the benefit to religion was "indirect , remote , and incidental. the court also found that there was no entanglement , and therefore , the creche was a constitutional display under the establishment clause . in allegheny county v. greater pittsburgh aclu , the court held that the display of a creche at a county courthouse violated the establishment clause .