they can be delivered by aircraft or from ground systems such as artillery , rockets , and missiles . the army's alternative warhead program ( awp ) is intended to assess and recommend new technologies to reduce or eliminate cluster munitions failure rates . the awp program is viewed as particularly relevant , as the pentagon estimates that "upward of 80 percent of u.s. cluster munitions reside in the army artillery stockpile. the fundamental criticisms of cluster munitions are that they disperse large numbers of submunitions imprecisely over an extended area , that they frequently fail to detonate and are difficult to detect , and that submunitions can remain explosive hazards for decades . cluster bombs were first used in world war ii , and inclusive of their debut , cluster munitions have been used in at least 21 states by at least 13 different countries . cluster munitions were used extensively in southeast asia by the united states in the 1960s and 1970s , and the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) estimates that in laos alone , 9 million to 27 million unexploded submunitions remained after the conflict , resulting in over 10,000 civilian casualties to date . the united states also maintains that using cluster munitions reduces the number of aircraft and artillery systems needed to support military operations , and that if cluster munitions were eliminated , significantly more money would need to be spent on new weapons systems , ammunition , and logistical resources . officials further suggest that if cluster munitions were eliminated , most militaries would increase their use of massed artillery and rocket barrages , which would likely increase destruction of key infrastructure . cluster munitions were used by the soviets in afghanistan , by the british in the falklands , by the coalition in the gulf war , and by the warring factions in yugoslavia . in kosovo and yugoslavia in 1999 , nato forces dropped 1,765 cluster bombs containing approximately 295,000 submunitions . from 2001 through 2002 , the united states dropped 1,228 cluster bombs containing 248,056 submunitions in afghanistan , and u.s. and british forces used almost 13,000 cluster munitions containing an estimated 1.8 million to 2 million submunitions during the first three weeks of combat in iraq in 2003 . senior u.s. government officials have stated that the united states has not used cluster munitions since 2003 , during the intervention in iraq . it is widely believed that confusion over u.s. cluster submunitions ( blu - 97 / b ) that were the same color and size as air - dropped humanitarian food packets played a major role in the u.s. decision to suspend cluster munitions use in afghanistan but not before using them in iraq . in 2006 , israeli use of cluster munitions against hezbollah forces in lebanon resulted in widespread international criticism . israel was said to have fired significant quantities of cluster munitions — primarily during the last 3 days of the 34-day war after a u.n. cease - fire deal had been agreed to — resulting in almost 1 million unexploded cluster bomblets to which the u.n. attributed 14 deaths during the conflict .