this report summarizes reach and progress in its implementation . the u.s. government was actively engaged throughout the development of reach . the bush administration expressed concerns about its trade implications for u.s. - produced chemicals . specific concerns included increased costs of and timelines for testing chemicals exported to the eu ; placement of responsibility on businesses ( as opposed to governments or consumers ) to generate data , assess risks , and demonstrate the safety of chemicals ; possible inconsistency with international rules for trade adopted by the world trade organization ( wto ) ; and the effect of the legislation on efforts to improve the coherence of chemical regulatory approaches among countries in the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) . some u.s. chemical industry representatives believe that reach is "impractical. industry has expressed objections to the proposed list of "high concern" chemicals , some of which are essential building blocks for the manufacture of other chemicals . the eu chemical industry is concerned about the cost of compliance , and what it might mean to innovation and international competitiveness . some national governments of the eu also are concerned about the impact of reach on their economies and employment , especially if reach leads to companies relocating outside the eu ( i.e. , no longer producing or selling products in the eu ) . the eu has estimated that about 12% of chemicals in commerce will be withdrawn by chemical producers , because continued production under reach will be costly and distribution not sufficiently profitable to recoup costs . in cases where no substitute is available , loss of a production source might leave some end users without the chemicals they need . many environmental , health , and u.s. and eu labor organizations strongly supported the original proposal for reach , but some are less enthusiastic about the final regulation , which retains its basic purpose and shape but exempts some chemicals from requirements . nevertheless , these groups agree that reach addressed some of what they saw as flaws in older eu laws covering chemicals . for example , reach reduces and coordinates eu regulatory requirements for providing health and safety information about chemicals new to the eu market ( as well as the number of new chemicals subject to such requirements ) , while at the same time increasing collection of such information for chemicals already in the eu market , thus potentially removing disincentives to innovation and encouraging substitution of less toxic for more toxic chemicals in various chemical applications . in addition , to address concerns about the slow pace of chemical risk assessment and management by the eu government , reach shifts responsibility for assessing and managing the safety of chemicals away from the government and onto chemical manufacturers , importers , and users . some public interest groups are urging u.s. legislators to adopt a similar legislative approach . for more discussion of the perceived flaws of u.s. law , see crs report rl34118 , the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) : implementation and new challenges , by [author name scrubbed] .