the house passed h.r . 2 on january 14 , 2009 . the related senate bill , s. 275 also contains an alternative option to the current citizenship documentation requirements . when the senate took up chipra , s. 275 became the substitute language for h.r . 2 , and it passed the senate on january 29 , 2009 . on february 4 , 2009 , the house agreed to the senate version of h.r . 2 , and president barack obama signed chipra 2009 into law as p.l . section 211 of chipra 2009 ( enacted as p.l . 111-3 ) permits states to elect an alternative process for verifying citizenship as required by §1903 ( x ) of the ssa . under the §211 option , the name and ssn of an applicant could be submitted to the commissioner of ssa . the commissioner would check the information received from the states against the ssa database and determine whether the name and ssn match and whether the ssa database shows that the applicant is a citizen . if the ssa cannot confirm the applicant's name , ssn and citizenship , the applicant would have to either resolve the inconsistency or provide satisfactory documentary evidence of citizenship as defined in §1903 ( x ) ( 3 ) , or else be disenrolled . thus , the ssa data matching option could , if enacted , substitute for the presentation of required citizenship documents under current law . section 211 ( c ) of chipra 2009would provide that the medicaid citizenship documentation requirements currently required under section 1903 ( x ) , and as amended by the provisions of §211 of chipra 2009 , would apply to schip , title xxi of the social security act . how §211 of chipra 2009 will be implemented will unfold in the coming month . the proposed alternative option in § 211 of h.r . 2 and s. 275 for verifying citizenship of medicaid applicants through a ssa database matching process is sparking considerable debate . proponents of this option point out the difficulty that some u.s. citizens have had in gathering the required citizenship documents under current law and maintain it is a barrier to the receipt of needed health services . they argue as well that it is a burden for states to administer the dra citizenship documentation provision . they maintain that the ssn data matching option would be an efficient and effective alternative because ssa would be looking at whether the declaration of citizenship is consistent with information in ssa's records , such as place of birth , and that ssa would be able to distinguish citizens from noncitizens . supporters of current law maintain that current law curbs fraud and identity theft by requiring citizens to present specific documents that establish their u.s. citizenship in order to reduce false claims of citizenship . they allege that aliens who entered illegally or overstayed their temporary visas might have easier access to medicaid and schip as a result of the proposed use of ssns to document citizenship . some assert that current law on documentation and verification should be strengthened and that the alternative option of ssn database matching for citizenship would weaken enforcement and increase fraud .