522 ( hastings ) . would require the secretary of homeland security to designate haiti as a country whose qualifying nationals may be eligible for temporary protected status for an initial 18-month period . introduced january17 , 2007 , referred to house judiciary committee's subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law february2 , 2007 . 438 ( lee ) . expressing the sense of congress with regard to providing humanitarian assistance to countries of the caribbean devastated by hurricanes gustav and ike and tropical storms fay and hanna . introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs september 27 , 2008 . the u.s. contribution equals 42.8% of that funding . minustah is also helping to coordinate disaster assistance , providing support for relief deliveries , and has been involved in rescuing haitians from the floods . in addition to assistance contributed to the flash appeal , ocha reports that another $25 million in humanitarian assistance has been pledged or provided by the united states and other countries and international organizations . consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 . provides not less than $100 million for hurricane relief and reconstruction assistance for haiti and other caribbean countries subject to prior consultation with , and the regular notification procedures of , the committees on appropriations . introduced june 8 , 2007 , signed into law september 30 , 2008 . nearly half of those affected by the storm are reportedly children . almost half of the shelters across the country are located in schools . the haitian ministry of education is working with international organizations to clean and rehabilitate schools and find alternative shelters . the number of internally displaced people living in shelters dropped from just over 111,000 in mid - september to an estimated 35,000 to 40,000 in mid - october . nonetheless , some schools will share their space with displaced people until they are able to return to their homes . moreover , many families who have lost their homes and possessions will not be able to afford school costs for their children . even though damage to schools delayed the start of the school year by over a month , the un world food program has already resumed school feeding programs throughout most of the country . prior to the storms , the haitian office for disaster preparedness issued warnings through radio and television , although not all citizens have access to those media . after the storms , the haitian government declared eight departments to be under a state of emergency , allowing for the release of extra funding from the national budget for relief efforts in those areas . the government is coordinating emergency response through the civilian protection unit of the ministry of the interior . the ministry of the interior is coordinating the distribution of relief assistance , working with the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) , the red cross , and a u.s. ship with hospital capability , the uss kearsarge , all of which are providing helicopters for delivering food and water aid to remote and inaccessible areas .