but the exception was just that , an exception . it was neither an affirmative grant of authority to request information nor a command to financial institutions to provide information when asked . it removed the restrictions on the release of customer information imposed on financial institutions by the right to financial privacy act , but it left them free to decline to comply when asked to do so . [i]n certain significant instances , financial institutions [had] declined to grant the fbi access to financial records in response to requests under [s]ection 1114 ( a ) . the fbi informed the committee that the problem occurs particularly in states which have state constitutional privacy protection provisions or state banking privacy laws . a substantial majority of the requests involved records relating to telephone or e - mail communications . the report is somewhat critical of the fbi's initial performance: [w]e found that the fbi used nsls in violation of applicable nsl statutes , attorney general guidelines , and internal fbi policies . in addition , we found that the fbi circumvented the requirements of the ecpa nsl statute when it issued at least 739 "exigent letters" to obtain telephone toll billing records and subscriber information from three telephone companies without first issuing nsls . the second ig report reviewed the fbi's use of national security letter authority during calendar year 2006 and the corrective measures taken following the issuance of the ig's first report . the second report concluded that the fbi's use of national security letters in 2006 continued the upward trend previously identified ; the percentage of nsl requests generated from investigations of u.s. persons increased from 39% of all nsl requests in 2003 to 57% in 2006 ; the fbi and doj are committed to correcting the problems identified in ig report i and have made significant progress ; and it is too early to say whether the corrective measures will resolve the problems previously identified . the third ig report examined the fbi's use of exigent letters and other informal means of acquiring communication service provider's customer records in lieu of relying on nsl authority during the period from 2003 to 2007 . the ig's office discovered that "the fbi's use of exigent letters became so casual , routine , and unsupervised that employees of all three communications service providers sometimes generated exigent letters for fbi personnel to sign and return to them. prior to amendment , two lower federal court cases had indicated that the nsls and practices surrounding their use were contrary to the requirements of the first amendment . yet it could not agree with the second circuit that nsl authority might be used if the confidentiality and judicial review provisions were implemented to satisfy constitutional demands . it eliminates the prospect of section 215-like bulk metadata collection under nsl authority . it revises the procedures for the issuance of nsl nondisclosure provisions and for judicial review of their issuance . finally , it augments existing reporting requirements for greater transparency . each of the nsl statutes now includes a requirement that the nsl demand be limited to specifically identified information rather than insisting on delivery of record information for all of a recipient's customers .