there is currently no website dedicated to this program . the navy's safe harbor ( sailors and families are extended a hand and assisted in recovery , benefits , opportunity and readjustment ) program was officially started in august 2005 at the navy annex , washington , dc . the program provides one - on - one support and advocacy for disabled sailors , marines , and their family members . a database has been established of more than 160 personnel who have been medically separated or retired since the start of oif / oef . to date , nearly all have been contacted and offered assistance ; additional support is ongoing for nearly 30 of these . the program is closely coordinated with the national naval medical center in bethesda , md , and with the casualty assistance officers . two cshs with four sites now exist in iraq . as the program matures , staffing will include approximately 28 active duty marines and several civilian employees . the program staff , similar to the other service programs , is responsible for coordinating and facilitating the full range of benefits , support , and transition assistance for marines and their families . to date , the m4l - is office has contacted over 1,000 previously separated or medically retired marines and is providing ongoing support to over 300 of them . the m4l - is staff also makes frequent visits to the walter reed medical center in washington , dc , and the national naval medical center in bethesda , md . these visits have extended support to over 600 wounded or injured marines and follow - on support to over 200 is continuing . m4l - is is augmented by a telephone hotline and regional outreach support that is provided by the military severely injured ( msi ) center . the marine for life - injured support office can be contacted at 1-866-645-8762 ( 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. , monday through friday ) and maintains a website at https: / / www.m4l.usmc.mil . the air force's palace hart ( helping airmen recover together ) program is an extension of an existing program to include support and advocacy for those returning from oef / oif with traumatic injures or severe illnesses . the air force uses family liaison officers ( flo ) , generally active duty airmen in medical treatment facilities or u.s. - based squadrons , for initial contact and support . these flos receive "just in time" training on processes , procedures , and support methodology . these are 248-bed hospitals with six operating tables , some specialty surgery services , and radiology and laboratory facilities . after three days at a csh , patients may be evacuated to one of three regional military hospitals in kuwait , spain , or germany . those requiring more than 30 days of treatment will be initially evacuated to major medical centers in the united states . typically , seriously injured military personnel are evacuated to the army's walter reed medical center in washington , dc , the national naval medical center in bethesda , md , or to brooke army medical center in san antonio , tx , which specializes in burn treatment .