sec . investments in securities by federal credit unions . this provision would expand federal credit unions' securities investment activities . federal credit unions are presently limited in their investment activities for safety and soundness reasons by the federal credit union act . currently , investment authority is limited to loans , government securities , deposits in other financial institutions and certain other investments . this provision would allow credit unions to have similar powers to banks in the securities business . it would allow credit unions to purchase certain investment - grade securities for the credit union's own account . the total investment in these instruments of any one obligor or maker could not exceed 10% of the credit union's net worth and the total investments could not exceed 10% of total assets . sec . increase in investment limit in credit union service organizations . organizations that provide services to credit unions and credit union members are commonly known as credit union service organizations ( cusos ) . an individual federal credit union is currently authorized to invest in aggregate up to 1% of its unimpaired capital and surplus in cusos . the provision would raise the amount a credit union may invest in cusos from 1% to 3% . banks and thrifts have the authority to make similar kinds of investments in their services related businesses . sec . member business loan exclusion for loans to non - profit religious organizations . under current law , federal credit unions can make loans only to their members , to other credit unions , and to credit union organizations . the aggregate limit on a credit union's net member business loan balances is the lesser of 1.75 times the credit union's net worth , or 12.25% of the credit union's total assets . this legislation would exclude from the member business loan limit , loans or loan participations to nonprofit religious organizations , effectively increasing the amount of business lending credit unions could make . sec . authority of the ncua to establish longer maturity for certain credit union loans . the regulatory relief act of 2006 gave the ncua the authority to increase the 12-year maturity limit on non - real estate secured loans to 15 years . this section would provide the ncua with the additional flexibility to issue regulations to increase that 15-year maturity limit to a longer term for specific types of loans . sec . providing the national credit union administration with greater flexibility in responding to market conditions . the rate of interest on loans made by a federal credit union may not exceed 15% ( the usury limit ) under most circumstances . this section would permit the ncua to consider whether sustained increases in money market interest rates or prevailing market interest rate levels threaten the safety and soundness of individual institutions when the agency is determining whether or not to lift the usury ceiling . sec . in addition , h.r . 6312 would lift the cap on member business loans less than it was lifted in the earlier legislation , and would drop the risk - based system . perhaps what was most important was that the compromise added the provisions of the bank regulatory relief act of 2008 ( h.r .