poland and the united states have historically close relations . under successive governments since 9 / 11 , warsaw has been a reliable supporter and ally in the global war on terrorism and , as noted earlier , has contributed troops to the u.s. - led coalitions in afghanistan and in iraq . the two smaller parties had at times blocked pis initiatives . the coalition was dissolved in early august 2007 , when members of so withdrew from the government after their leader , andrej lepper , was fired from his cabinet post on bribery charges . when lpr also left the coalition , pis was left with just 150 members in the 460-seat lower house of parliament , and decided to call elections in hopes of strengthening its mandate . the decision to hold early elections proved to be a political miscalculation by jaroslaw , who underestimated popular dissatisfaction with his government and the consequent determination of poles to oust pis . turnout on election day was 55.3% — the largest since the end of the communist era . this unprecedented voter participation , particularly by young people , is considered to have been a key factor . although pis received more votes in 2007 than it had in the 2005 elections , the increase came largely at the expense of its former coalition partners , so and lpd , neither of which managed to pass the 5% threshold necessary for representation in parliament . in addition , the increase in pis votes was more than offset by the big jump in turnout — 15% over earlier elections . tusk's party won 209 seats , and its coalition partner , the centrist polish peasants party , took 31 ; together , they hold a comfortable majority in parliament , and tusk was sworn in as prime minister in november 2007 . however , the new government will likely face staunch resistance on some issues from president lech kaczynski , whose term runs until 2010 . since a 60% vote is necessary to override a presidential veto , the government may need occasional help from the leftist lid . some analysts believe that the elections reflected a tug - of - war between the emerging liberal ( i.e. he also recruited holocaust survivor and former foreign minister wladyslaw bartoszewski as an advisor , and tasked him with mending ties with berlin . several important bilateral issues , such as the proposed pipeline , are still pending , but the new government appears to believe they can be better solved through cooperation rather than confrontation . , free - market ) poland , embodied by tusk's po , and the poland of "social solidarity," which advocates continued government intervention in the economy represented by pis . however , on a practical level , many poles believed that , rather than addressing needed reforms , pis had embarrassed poland internationally and had wasted precious time and resources in its hunt to expose members of the so - called uklad — the "web" of former communist elites that the kaczynski brothers were convinced had manipulated successive governments from behind the curtain since 1989 .