the audio flag , according to its proponents , would operate in a similar manner as the broadcast video flag that has been proposed for digital television transmissions . two bills were introduced in the 109 th congress that would have delegated such authority ; these may represent legislative approaches that could be taken in the 110 th congress . this bill would have empowered the fcc to promulgate regulations governing the licensing of "all technologies necessary to make transmission and reception devices" for digital broadcast and satellite radio . title iv , subtitle c of s. 2686 would have granted the fcc the authority to issue "regulations governing the indiscriminate redistribution of audio content with respect to — digital radio broadcasts , satellite digital radio transmissions , and digital radios. it also directed the fcc to establish an advisory committee known as the "digital audio review board," composed of representatives from several industries , including information technology , software , consumer electronics , radio and satellite broadcasting , audio recording , music publishing , performing rights societies , and public interest groups . the board would have been responsible for drafting a proposed regulation that reflects a consensus of the members of the board and that is "consistent with fair use principles," although the bill did not define whether such "fair use" has the same connotation as that used in the copyright law . these statutory rights allow a copyright holder to do or to authorize , among other things , reproducing the work , distributing copies or phonorecords of the work , and publicly performing the work . parties holding a copyright interest in content transmitted through digital radio services are interested in ensuring that such content is protected from unauthorized reproduction and distribution by the broadcast recipient ; the audio flag , in their view , is an effective way to achieve this objective and enforce their rights . proponents of audio flag technology also suggest that it would help prevent certain digital radio services ( like satellite radio ) from becoming a music download service through the creation of recording and storage devices that allow for further reproduction and distribution of audio broadcasts . some copyright holders argue that these broadcasters must either pay additional royalties for the privilege of offering what appears to be a music download service , or comply with an audio flag regime that will effectively prevent broadcasters from allowing the recording in the first place . critics of the audio flag proposal raise concerns that such a government - mandated measure may stifle technological innovation and restrict the rights of consumers to record broadcast radio — conduct that , according to audio flag opponents , is protected by the audio home recording act of 1992 , as well as "fair use" principles in copyright law . legislation that expressly delegates authority to the fcc to mandate audio flags for digital radio transmissions would appear to be necessary before the fcc could take such steps , in the wake of a decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit in 2005 that vacated an fcc order requiring digital televisions to be manufactured with the capability to prevent unauthorized redistributions of digital video content .