a major outcome of the summit was the announcement of the spp . the primary purpose of the initiative was to improve cooperative efforts among the three countries in areas related to economic prosperity and the protection of the environment , the food supply , and public health . the 12 members of the european union that have adopted the euro as a common currency is the most significant example of a group of countries that has moved forward from a customs union to an economic union . one of the stated goals of the spp was to improve the safety , security , and efficiency of the flow goods between the three countries . the majority of trade between the united states , canada and mexico is transported by land modes ( truck , rail , and pipeline ) . u.s. freight trade with canada and mexico more than doubled in value between 1996 and 2007 , growing from $419 billion in 1996 to $909 billion in 2007 . trucks were the dominant mode for transporting goods between the united states and its nafta partners , accounting for 61% ( $555 billion ) of the value of total trade in 2007 . this growth in the volume of freight placed an increasing burden on transportation systems , and particularly the road network . data however , was showing a decline in the volume of surface transportation trade between the united states and its nafta partners in 2008 . for example , the bureau of transportation statistics ( bts ) reported that the value of trade using surface transportation between the united states and canada for november 2008 was $37.8 billion , which represented a 16.4% decline compared to november of 2007 . similarly , bts reported that u.s. - mexico surface transportation trade for november 2008 totaled $22.9 billion , representing a decline of 9% compared to november 2007 . these measures combined indicated that surface transportation trade for november 2008 between the united states and its nafta partners declined 13.8% as compared to november 2007 . some observers contended that the spp would ultimately lead to a so - called "nafta superhighway" that would link the united states , canada , and mexico with a 'super - corridor' . the federal government however , stated that there were no plans to build a "nafta superhighway," and that no super - corridor initiative of any sort was a part of the spp . further , no legal authority existed and no funds were appropriated to construct such a superhighway , nor were there any plans to seek such authority or funding . states regularly undertake highway construction and improvement projects , independently of any initiatives under the former spp . as noted above , the nation's freight transportation system is being exposed to an increasing burden from cross - border trade . states and localities undertake highway projects to address the impacts of this increasing burden on the roadways , particularly in border states .