amend . vi . in 1998 , the supreme court held that federal charges involving money laundering , in florida but of the proceeds from drug trafficking in missouri , could not be tried in missouri , united states v. cabrales , 524 u.s.1 , ( 1998 ) . the following year , the court held that use of a firearm , in maryland , in connection with a multi - state kidnaping could be tried in new jersey , united states v. rodriguez - moreno , 526 u.s. 275 ( 1999 ) . subsequent congresses have seen a number of proposals to expand venue for the trial of various federal criminal offenses . the pattern continued in the 109 th . constitutional venue requirements understood in light of cabrales and rodriguez - moreno might have precluded realization of the full literal benefits of some of these proposals . cabrales is not as restrictive as it might seem at first ; nor is rodriguez - moreno as permissive . cabrales laundered the missouri drug money in florida , but there was no evidence that she was a member of the missouri drug trafficking conspiracy or that she had transported the money from missouri to florida . the court acknowledged that she might have been tried in missouri had either been the case , 524 u.s. at 8 , 10 . rodriguez - moreno and his confederates kidnapped a drug trafficking associate and transported him over the course of time from texas to new jersey and then to maryland . rodriguez - moreno acquired the firearm with which he threatened the kidnap victim in maryland but was tried in new jersey for using a firearm "during and in relation to a crime of violence [kidnaping]" in violation of 18 u.s.c . 924 ( c ) ( 1 ) . section 924 ( c ) ( 1 ) in the eyes of the court has "two distinct conduct elements . using and carrying of a gun and the commission of a kidnaping," 526 u.s. at 280 ( emphasis added ) . a crime with distinct conduct elements may be tried wherever any of those elements occurred ; kidnaping is a continuous offense that in this case began in texas and continued through new jersey to maryland ; venue over the kidnaping , a conduct element of the section 924 ( c ) ( 1 ) , was proper in texas , new jersey or maryland ; consequently venue over the violation of section 924 ( c ) ( 1 ) was proper in either texas , new jersey or maryland , 526 u.s. at 280-82 . the court was quick to distinguish cabrales from rodriguez - moreno : "the existence of criminally generated proceeds [in cabrales ] was a circumstance element of the offense but the proscribed conduct — defendant's money laundering activity — occurred after the fact of the offense begun and completed by others. in rodriguez - moreno , "given the 'during and in relation to' language , the underlying crime of violence is a critical part of the §924 ( c ) ( 1 ) offense," 526 u.s. at 280-81 n.4 .