such students shall not have access to their parents' financial records . letters and statements of recommendation submitted prior to the enactment of ferpa must also remain confidential if the letters are not used for other purposes . finally , recommendations regarding admission to any educational agency or institution , employment application , and the receipt of an honor must remain confidential if the student has signed a waiver of his right of access . in addition to requirements regarding access to educational records , ferpa prohibits educational agencies or institutions that receive federal funds from having a policy or practice of releasing the education records of a student without the written consent of his parents . in addition , each educational agency or institution must maintain a record that identifies those individuals , agencies , or organizations that have requested or obtained access to a student's education records . it is important to note that consent is not required for the release of education records to certain individuals and organizations . these exceptions to ferpa's general prohibition against nonconsensual disclosure of educational records are described in detail below , as are controversial 2011 regulations that , among other things , permit educational agencies and institutions to disclose personally identifiable information to third parties under limited circumstances . under ferpa , educational agencies and institutions found to have a policy of denying parental access to a student's education records or releasing a student's education records without written consent may be denied federal funds . the secretary of education is authorized to deal with violations of the act and to establish or designate a review board for investigating and adjudicating ferpa violations . the family policy compliance office ( fpco ) , which acts as a review board , permits students and parents who suspect a violation to file individual written complaints . if a violation is found after investigation , the fpco will notify the complainant and the educational agency or institution of its findings and identify the specific steps that the agency or institution must take to comply with ferpa . if the agency or institution fails to comply within a reasonable period of time , the secretary may either withhold further payments under any applicable program , issue a complaint to compel compliance through a cease - and - desist order , or terminate eligibility to receive funding . in gonzaga university v. doe , the court considered whether a student could enforce the provisions of ferpa by suing an institution for damages under 42 u.s.c . section 1983 , which provides a remedy for violations of federally conferred rights . the respondent , a former student at gonzaga , planned to teach in the washington state public school system after graduation . washington required new teachers to obtain an affidavit of good moral character from a dean of their graduating college or university , but the respondent was denied such an affidavit after gonzaga's teacher certification specialist informed the state agency responsible for teacher certification of allegations involving sexual misconduct by the respondent . the court also observed that ferpa's nondisclosure provisions had an aggregate focus and were not concerned with the needs of any particular person .