a hearing under 18 u.s.c . ยง3184 is scheduled to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable . if the court finds the fugitive to be extraditable , it enters an order of extraditability and certifies the record to the secretary of state , who decides whether to surrender the fugitive to the requesting government . in some cases a fugitive may waive the hearing process . oia notifies the foreign government and arranges for the transfer of the fugitive to the agents appointed by the requesting country to receive him or her . although the order following the extradition hearing is not appealable ( by either the fugitive or the government ) , the fugitive may petition for a writ of habeas corpus as soon as the order is issued . the district court's decision on the writ is subject to appeal , and extradition may be stayed if the court so orders . the laws of the country of refuge and the applicable extradition treaty govern extradition back to the united states of a fugitive located overseas . the request for extradition comes from the department of state whether extradition is sought for trial in federal or state court or for execution of a criminal sentence under federal or state law . the first step is to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable . the justice department's checklist for determining extraditability begins with an identification of the country in which the fugitive has taken refuge . if the united states has no extradition treaty with the country of refuge , extradition is not a likely option . when there is a treaty , extradition is only an option if the treaty permits extradition . common impediments include citizenship , dual criminality , statutes of limitation , and capital punishment issues . many treaties permit a country to refuse to extradite its citizens even in the case of dual citizenship . as for dual criminality , whether the crime of conviction or the crime charged is an extraditable offense will depend upon the nature of the crime and where it was committed . although less frequently employed by the united states , "irregular rendition" is a familiar alternative to extradition . an alternative of last resort , it involves kidnaping or deceit and generally has been reserved for terrorists , drug traffickers , and the like . kidnaping a defendant overseas and returning him to the united states for trial does not deprive american courts of jurisdiction unless an applicable extradition treaty explicitly calls for that result . nor does it ordinarily expose the united states to liability under the federal tort claims act or individuals involved in the abduction to liability under the alien tort statute . the individuals involved in the abduction , however , may face foreign prosecution , or at least be the subject of a foreign extradition request . moreover , the effort may strain diplomatic relations with the country from which the fugitive is lured or abducted . a final alternative when extradition for trial in the united states is not available , is trial within the country of refuge .