4893 , have been reported . both bills delete the exception requiring secretarial and gubernatorial agreement , but allow applications filed before a certain 2006 date ( march 7 for h.r . a september 2005 justice department statement echoed this concern over constitutionality . opponents also argue that the united states does not have a special responsibility to native hawaiians as it has for indian tribes . opponents also contend that recognition of a native hawaiian political entity would be based on race alone , arguing that unlike indian tribes the native hawaiian entity would not need to meet criteria of geography , community , and continuous political autonomy . they argue further that native hawaiian recognition would set a precedent for political recognition of other , race - based , non - indian groups . for instance , the u.s. civil rights commission on may 5 , 2006 , issued a briefing report opposing passage of s. 147 as reported , citing racial discrimination concerns . in addition , some opponents dispute the claims regarding native hawaiian sovereignty , arguing among other things that native hawaiians' sovereignty ended well before 1893 because the kingdom gave political rights to non - native hawaiians , or that sovereignty resided in the monarch , not the native hawaiian people , and ended with the 1893 overthrow . bills similar to s. 147 and h.r . they also argue that congress has recognized a "special political and legal relationship with the native hawaiian people" ( s. 147 , â§2 ( 21 ) ) identical with that with indian tribes . they point to the numerous native hawaiian programs that congress has established , especially the hawaiian homelands program , which was established in 1921 when hawaii was a territory but is now under hawaii state control ( with certain continuing congressional duties ) , under which certain public lands are reserved for lease only to native hawaiians . proponents argue that native hawaiians have not given up their claims to sovereignty but rather had sovereignty forcibly withdrawn in the 1893 overthrow of the kingdom of hawaii , an action led by americans living in hawaii and with the active support of certain u.s. officials and armed forces there . ( the new republic of hawaii agreed to u.s. annexation in 1898. ) they further state that native hawaiians , like indian tribes , have maintained a single distinct community , with cultural and political institutions . opponents dispute these points . they argue that congress's authority extends only to indian tribes , not to all indigenous peoples , and that hence congress does not have constitutional authority to recognize a native hawaiian political entity . 309 received extensive consideration in the previous three congresses . s. 147 was reported by the senate indian affairs committee on may 16 , 2005 ( s.rept . s. 3064 , an amended version of s. 147 introduced may 25 , 2006 , is based on discussions among congressional offices , the administration , and the state of hawaii . the senate on june 8 , 2006 , failed to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed to consider s. 147 , effectively ending senate consideration of s. 147 and s. 3064 .