transfer the authority to set the budget for the district of columbia schools to the mayor . if the charter amendment by referendum process was used , the home rule act would require city council and voter approval of the proposal and would allow a period for congressional review and consideration . it could pass legislation waiving the 35 legislative days review period , thus expediting the effective date of the charter amendment . congress would have four options: it could pass a resolution of disapproval within 35 legislative days of the board of election and ethics certifying that the proposed charter amendment had been approved by a majority of the voting electorate . such a resolution would have the effect of voiding the outcome of the referendum and could be considered by some observers as an affront to home rule , while others could point out that it is within congress's constitutional authority . congress's authority to review , amend , and approve or disapprove the mayor's education proposal is derived from the "district clause" of the constitution , which states that congress has the power to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever , over such district ( not exceeding ten miles square ) as may , by cession of particular states , and the acceptance of congress , become the seat of the government of the united states . in 1973 , congress passed the district of columbia self - government and governmental reorganization act , p.l . 93-198 ( home rule act ) , which granted the district citizens an elected form of government with limited home rule . the home rule act gave district voters the right to elect a mayor , a city council , and an independent board of education . it also outlined the powers afforded to the d.c. council and the retention of congress's constitutional authority to legislate within the district . this retention of constitutional authority is recognized in the home rule act and the d.c. code , which states â§ 1-206.01 retention of constitutional authority . notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter , the congress of the united states reserves the right , at any time , to exercise its constitutional authority as legislature for the district , by enacting legislation for the district on any subject , whether within or without the scope of legislative power granted to the council by this chapter , including legislation to amend or repeal any law in force in the district prior to or after enactment of this chapter and any act passed by the city council . the proposed education reform act contemplates two concurrent avenues for achieving a proposed restructuring of the district of columbia public school system: ( 1 ) passage of legislation by the city council , and ( 2 ) congressional amendment of the home rule act . the majority of the reorganization proposal could be implemented by the city council acting under its delegated authority to reorganize agencies of the district of columbia .