in other states , the disqualification is time - limited . these states penalize the worker for quitting , but recognize that economic conditions may be such that even a person who diligently seeks work may find none . the reasoning is that beyond a certain point , if a diligent job seeker is still unemployed , such continuing unemployment is attributable to labor market conditions rather than their decision to quit . thus , spouses relocating to areas of high unemployment or limited opportunities may become eligible for benefits even if initially disqualified . twenty - seven states and the district of columbia allow uc benefits if a worker quits to accompany a spouse who has been transferred regardless of military status ( labeled "y" in table 2 ) . senator john mccain sponsored an identically named bill ( s. 1376 ) that contained similar provisions . in addition , another 20 states have special exceptions for workers who quit to follow their transferred military spouse ( labeled as "military only" ) . only idaho , louisiana , and north dakota do not consider quitting to follow a military spouse a voluntary quit "good cause. workers who quit their jobs and move to accompany their military spouse may receive uc benefits in many states as listed in table 2 . these states do not charge uc benefits to employer accounts when workers voluntarily quit their jobs to accompany a transferred military spouse . the benefits paid to a worker accompanying a military spouse generally would not increase the state unemployment taxes of the worker's former employer . however , these benefits are still charged to the state's account within the utf . treatment of civilian spouses who quit their employment because their military spouse was transferred varies greatly among the states . in the majority of states , a quit to follow a transferred spouse may be deemed a "good personal" cause and the newly unemployed worker may receive uc benefits . however , some state uc programs do not award uc benefits to workers who quit their jobs because a spouse was transferred , deeming this as a "voluntary quit. the laws of the state may go further and include a specific disqualification for claimants who quit work to relocate with a spouse until certain additional income is generated . the disqualification following a "voluntary quit" continues until the claimant returns to work , completes a specified duration of work , and earns wages of a specified amount . senator ron johnson sponsored s. 1356 , which was enacted as the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , p.l . in addition to many other actions , the law altered certain conditions for individuals to receive ucx . the law generally prohibits the concurrent receipt of ucx and post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance but did provide exceptions . in addition , the law doubled the number of days ( from 90 to 180 continuous days ) a reserve member of the armed forces would have to be on active duty to qualify for ucx . two earlier proposals had similar provisions , but did not include exceptions to the prohibition of concurrent receipt . representative mac thornberry sponsored h.r .