110-140 , sec . 712 ) directs the secretary of the interior to develop a methodology to assess carbon sequestration and emissions from ecosystems . this methodology is to cover measuring , monitoring , and quantifying ghg emissions and reductions , and provide estimates of sequestration capacity and the mitigation potential of different ecosystem management practices . the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ) includes a provision ( sec . 2709 ) directing usda to "establish technical guidelines that outline science - based methods to measure the environmental services benefits," including carbon storage , from forests and agricultural activities . this includes developing measurement procedures and a reporting protocol and registry . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l . protocols may be either voluntary or set by regulation . in one voluntary market , the chicago climate exchange ( ccx ) has protocols for a range of soil and land management projects , including agricultural methane , soil carbon , rangeland soil carbon management , and tree planting projects . the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) — the first regional mandatory , market - based effort to reduce ghg emissions — is developing technical standards for a narrower set of offset projects from the agricultural and forestry sectors , providing for afforestation and methane reduction from livestock operations . individual requirements of current protocols and standards can vary widely by program . numerous methods exist to measure forest and agricultural carbon . the appropriate measure to use in specific circumstances depends on several variables , including the purpose for measuring the carbon , the scale and basis to be measured , the frequency of the measurement , and how the measurement is to be verified . congress has already taken steps to address some of the challenges associated with measuring carbon changes from forested and agricultural lands and practices . congress continues to face the question of whether its current authorized activities provide adequate and sufficient guidelines for accurately measuring carbon levels from forest and agricultural activities . the appendix provides an annotated assessment of a range of agricultural and forestry activities , describing potential considerations according to measurement ( quantification , verification , and monitoring ) , additionality , permanence , and leakage . the text box below provides a brief description of these different criteria . for more background information , see crs report rl34241 , voluntary carbon offsets: overview and assessment . the possible use of forestry and agricultural practices and lands to mitigate or sequester co 2 is part of the debate . however , substantial uncertainty exists about current ability to accurately quantify , monitor , and verify the amount of carbon sequestered by various agricultural and forestry practices . by comparison , measuring the carbon from a discrete point source , such as a power plant , is relatively easy and precise . incorporating the agriculture and forestry sectors in an emissions reduction program will likely require a firm basis for measuring carbon inventories and change for forestry and agricultural practices and lands .