you have an economy that has been well managed . […and] there's been a greater level of transparency and openness , the growth strategy here in ghana have been ones that are actually delivering improved standards of living for the people . so we think that ghana can be an extraordinary model for success throughout the continent and we are very much looking forward to strengthening what is already a strong friendship between the united states and ghana for many years to come . president obama also used the trip to highlight u.s. investments in maternal health in africa , and to highlight the personal connection of himself and his family to africa . he touched upon his own personal family heritage and familial roots in africa while addressing ghana's parliament and , along with his family , toured cape coast castle , a major former hub trans - atlantic slave trade . of the latter experience , in the first commentary in africa on the effects of the trans - atlantic slave trade by a sitting u.s. president of african descent , he stated: it is reminiscent of the trip i took to buchenwald because it reminds us of the capacity of human beings to commit great evil . [...] i think , as americans , and as african americans , obviously there's a special sense that on the one hand this place [cape coast castle] was a place of profound sadness ; on the other hand , it is here where the journey of much of the african american experience began . and symbolically , to be able to come back with my family , with michelle and our children , and see the portal through which the diaspora began , but also to be able to come back here in celebration with the people of ghana of the extraordinary progress that we've made because of the courage of so many , black and white , to abolish slavery and ultimately win civil rights for all people , i think is a source of hope . it reminds us that as bad as history can be , it's also possible to overcome . president mills took office on january 7 , 2009 , succeeding former president kufuor at the end of his second term in office . the new government's first priority reportedly centered on gaining control over economic policy administration and the government's administrative apparatus from the departing new patriotic party ( npp ) government . in particular , it reportedly sought to stabilize the declining exchange rate of the national currency , the cedi ; halt a rapid rise in fiscal spending , leading to a rising current account deficit ; and check inflation . these challenges were compounded by the subsequent global recession , a slowing economy , due in part to weakening commodity prices , and a contraction of access to international and local credit , but were aided by a simultaneous decline in imports and growth in exports .