the court acknowledged the reprehensibility of the crime of rape . however , the court reasoned that child rape cannot be compared to murder in terms of "severity and irrevocability. the majority found that imposition of the death penalty for non - homicide child rape would be counterproductive to the goals of rehabilitation , deterrence , and retribution . as for retribution , the court questioned whether the death penalty for non - homicide crimes balances the wrong done to the victim . the court reasoned that the evolving standards of decency require restraint in the application of capital punishment . as such , capital punishment should be reserved for a narrow category of crimes and / or offenses . the court concluded that there was no evidence that a child rape victim's hurt would be diminished when the law allows capital punishment for the perpetrator . instead , it reasoned that it is likely there would be additional harm as minors would be forced to endure the stressors of reliving the traumatic events repeatedly . in addition , the court noted systematic concerns in prosecuting child rape cases , including the problem of "unreliable , induced , and even imagined child testimony" that may lead to "wrongful execution" in some cases . the majority felt that allowing capital punishment for the crime of child rape had additional negative implications that are counterproductive to the goal of deterrence . for example , victims may be "more likely to shield the perpetrator from discovery , thus increasing underreporting. in addition , punishing child rape with death may remove a strong incentive for the rapist to spare the victim's life . in its analysis , the court distinguished child rape from other death - eligible crimes because it is a crime against an individual person . it ruled that the death penalty should not be permitted when the victim's life was not taken . however , the court did not address , and consequently left open , the possibility of imposing the death penalty for non - homicide crimes against the state , such as treason , espionage , terrorism , and drug kingpin activity . justice alito , writing for the dissent , expressed the view that the majority's decision conflicts with the original meaning of the 8 th amendment and ignores the moral depravity of the crime . in addition , he felt that the small number of states which enacted child rape statutes was not based on a national consensus against execution of child rapists , but rather on the broad dicta presented in coker . also , he felt that the 8 th amendment protects an accused's right , and does not authorize the majority to strike down criminal laws on the ground that they are not in the best interest of crime victims or society at large . the "evolving standards of decency" principle appears to be a flexible rule of construction intended to evolve with societal norms as they develop so that the court may reflect these norms in its constitutionality review . this principle now appears to be the primary framework within which the court reviews constitutional claims challenging the application of the death penalty .