some exemptions from these reporting requirements are provided . for example , section 18 ( a ) of the securities exchange act grants an express private right of action to investors who have been injured by reliance upon material misstatements or omissions of facts in reports which have been filed with the sec . section 10 ( b ) of the 1934 act , the general antifraud provision , and rule 10b - 5 , issued by the sec to carry out the statutory fraud prohibition , provide for a cause of action for injuries which have been caused by omissions , misrepresentations , or manipulations of material facts in statements other than those filed in documents with the sec . the investment company act of 1940 was enacted to protect investors who use others to manage and diversify their investments . an investment company that meets the statutory definition of "investment company" and that is not exempted from the act must register with the sec and file specified information . unless the investment company complies with the provisions of the act , it cannot participate in certain activities involving securities . various affiliations and interests of directors , officers , and employees of investment companies are circumscribed . for example , an investment company cannot have a board of directors with more than 60% of the members considered interested persons of the company . registered investment companies must file specified reports and financial statements . the investment advisers act of 1940 defines an investment adviser as any person who for compensation advises others as to the value of securities or as to the advisability of investing in , purchasing , or selling securities or who for compensation analyzes securities . unless registered with the sec , it is unlawful for any investment adviser to make use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce in connection with his business as an investment adviser . an investment adviser may be registered by filing specified information with the sec . the insider trading sanctions act of 1984 was enacted because of the belief that [i]nsider trading threatens ... markets by undermining the public's expectations of honest and fair securities markets where all participants play by the same rules . this legislation provides increased sanctions against insider trading in order to increase deterrence of violations . "insider trading" is the term used to refer to trading in the securities markets while in possession of "material" information ( generally , information that would be important to an investor in making a decision to buy or sell a security ) that is not available to the general public . the act provides that , if the commission believes that any person has bought or sold a security while in possession of material nonpublic information , the commission may bring an action in u.s. district court to seek a civil penalty . the penalty may be up to three times the profit gained or loss avoided . after a number of hearings and considerable debate in the 100 th congress , the president signed the insider trading and securities fraud enforcement act of 1988 ( p.l .