that was the case in this instance . according to crs interviews , in addition to germany , representatives of france and at least two other governments indicated that they wish the map process to go more slowly ; they opposed georgia's and ukraine's entry into the map at this time . several other governments also opposed the map for georgia and ukraine but would not have blocked consensus had it been within reach , which it was not . while some governments indicated a desire not to antagonize russia , they said that larger issues were also considered . a majority of ukraine's population opposes nato membership ; some allies believe that kiev must persuade its population of the value of membership before the map process can begin . some allies also believe that georgia must first stage its parliamentary elections in may and achieve acceptable international standards , and that it must make progress on resolving its two "frozen" conflicts within its territory . some allies also raised another subject , not directly related to the two countries' qualifications . these allies believe that progress must be made to ensure greater energy security in countries vulnerable to a russian cut - off of their energy resources . representatives of several allied governments criticized the administration's handling of the map issue . they noted that several allies had clearly indicated before the summit their opposition to georgia and ukraine joining the map , and that president bush's campaign in georgia and ukraine , and then at the summit , to persuade them to change their minds ignored their concerns . they also noted that their opposition to the map for the two countries went well beyond concern over russia's possible reaction to a favorable decision . the allies agreed in the communiquã© upon the unusual formulation , "we agreed today that these countries [georgia and ukraine] will become members of nato. the allies apparently wished to signal their confidence in the ability of the two countries' governments to make the necessary reforms to qualify for membership . the statement was also an obvious message to moscow that it may not determine which governments enter nato . the allies did not provide a time frame for eventual membership . nato carried out a bombing campaign against serbian forces in 1999 in a successful attempt to stop serb "ethnic cleansing" of the majority albanian population in kosovo , then a serbian province . under u.n. security council resolution 1244 ( 1999 ) , the united nations established a protectorate mission ( unmik ) in kosovo . in 2006-2007 , u.n. envoy martti ahtisaari developed a plan for kosovo's "supervised independence" and serbian minority rights under eu leadership . russia would not accept the ahtisaari plan , and threatened to veto it in the security council . after long preparation , the european union and the united states together decided to implement the ahtisaari plan . kosovo declared itself sovereign and independent on february 17 , 2008 . the united states and a majority of eu countries quickly followed with a recognition of kosovo's independence , which serbia and russia continue to oppose .