these materials are considered to be in the public domain . works in the public domain are available for anyone to use without concern of infringement . the grant of copyright bestows several rights upon the creator of a work ( or the individual having a legal interest in the work ) that permit the copyright holder to control the use of the protected material . these statutory rights allow a copyright holder to do or to authorize the following: the reproduction of the copyrighted work ; the preparation of derivative works based on the copyrighted work ; the distribution of copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work ; the public performance of the copyrighted work ; and the public display of the copyrighted work , including the individual images of a motion picture . the copyright act contains several statutory limitations on the copyright monopoly . these include the "first sale doctrine" that limits the copyright owner's exclusive control over distribution of the material objects in which a work is expressed . the "first sale doctrine" permits the owner of a particular copy of a copyrighted work to sell or dispose of that copy without the copyright owner's permission . other limitations involve allowing certain reproductions by libraries and archives , limited performances and displays for educational purposes or in the course of services at a place of worship , and certain performances for non - profit , charitable causes . the doctrine of "fair use" in copyright law recognizes the right of the public to make reasonable use of copyrighted material , under particular circumstances , without the copyright holder's consent . for example , a teacher may be able to use reasonable excerpts of copyrighted works in preparing a scholarly lecture or commentary , without obtaining permission to do so . the copyright act mentions fair use "for purposes such as criticism , comment , news reporting , teaching , scholarship , or research. however , a determination of fair use by a court considers four factors: the purpose and character of the use including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes , the nature of the copyrighted work , the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole , and the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work . because the language of the fair use statute is illustrative , determining what constitutes a fair use of a copyrighted work is often difficult to make in advance — according to the u.s. supreme court , such a determination requires a federal court to engage in "case - by - case" analysis . in 1998 , congress passed the digital millennium copyright act ( dmca ) . section 1201 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the dmca prohibits any person from circumventing a technological measure that effectively controls access to a copyrighted work . this newly created right of "access" granted to copyright holders makes the act of gaining access to copyrighted material by circumventing digital rights management ( drm ) security measures , itself , a violation of the copyright act .