attorneys manual . the 110 th congress adjourned without further action of the proposals . the filip memorandum dates from august 28 , 2008 . following the pattern of earlier memoranda , much of what appears in the u.s . it is also identical to h.r . 3013 introduced in the house by representative scott and virtually identical to the version of that bill passed by the house . the court of appeals agreed . it held ( 1 ) that the firm's "adoption and enforcement of a policy under which it conditioned , capped and ultimately ceased advancing legal fees to defendants followed as direct consequence of the government's overwhelming influence ; " ( 2 ) that the firm's "conduct therefore amounted to state action ; " ( 3 ) that "the government thus unjustifiably interfered with defendants' relationship with counsel and their ability to mount a defense in violation of the sixth amendment ; " and ( 4 ) that "the government did not cure the violation. both the house and senate judiciary committees held hearings on the policy reflected in the thompson memorandum during the 109 th congress , and in its final days , senator specter introduced s. 30 which , among other things , would have prohibited federal authorities from requesting a waiver of organizational attorney - client or work product protection or predicating the adverse exercise of prosecutorial discretion of the absence of such a waiver or the payment of attorneys' fees for their employees or officers . the mcnulty memorandum , announced december 12 , 2006 , superseded the thompson and mccallum memoranda . while it incorporated a great deal of the substance of its predecessors , the mcnulty memorandum rewrote the principles and commentary that address corporate attorney - client and work product protection waivers as well as those covering the payment of employee litigation costs . it dropped the specific reference to the waivers from the general statement of factors to be weighed when considering whether to charge a corporation . where earlier memoranda stated that waiver was not an "absolute" requirement for the favorable exercise of prosecutorial discretion , suggesting to some that it was a requirement under most circumstances , the mcnulty memorandum suggested that prosecutors' waiver requests were to be considered the exception rather than the rule . moreover , the mcnulty memorandum divided attorney - client and work product material into two categories . category i consisted of factual information . category ii material was described in much the same manner as opinion work product material . the memorandum cautioned prosecutors that only in rare circumstances should they seek the waiver of category ii material . a request for category i had to be approved by the united states attorney in consultation with the head of the department's criminal division ; a request for category ii information required prior approval of the deputy attorney general . a corporation's refusal to waive cannot be considered in the exercise of prosecutorial discretion .