the parents then filed a civil action in district court . the individuals with disabilities education act is both a grants statute and a civil rights statute . requiring a minimum level of competence was described as protecting not only the represented party but also his or her adversaries as well as the court from poor drafted or vexatious claims . the supreme court granted certiorari on october 27 , 2006 . a licensed attorney would be subject to ethical obligations and may be sued for malpractice while an individual not represented by an attorney would not have these protections . the parents in collinsgru argued that since , as parents , they were responsible for their son's education , they had joint substantive rights with their child under idea . they noted that parents are often the only available advocates for their child and that attorneys are often unwilling to take idea cases due to their specialized and complicated nature and since the cases often lack significant retainers . the court expressed some sympathy for these arguments but noted that congress had provided for attorneys' fees in idea , and concluded that idea's statutory provisions indicated that "the rights at issue here are divisible , and not concurrent. the parents and the child were thus found to possess different idea rights: the parents "possess explicit rights in the form of procedural safeguards" while the child possesses both procedural and substantive rights . other courts have also found that parents have procedural rights under idea which they can bring suit pro se to enforce . in mosely v. board of education of the city of chicago , the seventh circuit observed that idea "provides both children and their parents with an elaborate set of procedural safeguards that must be observed in the course of providing the child a free , appropriate public education. citing collinsgru for the proposition that idea confers different rights on parents and children , the court found that the parent's procedural rights were enough of an interest to allow a pro se suit to enforce these parental rights to proceed . similarly , in wenger v. canastota central school district the second circuit denied a parent's attempt to bring a suit pro se on behalf of his child but stated that the parent "... is , of course , entitled to represent himself on his claims that his own rights as a parent under the idea were violated.... . cavanaugh held that parents could not represent their child in an idea action and that the right of a child with a disability to fape did not grant such a right to the child's parents . the sixth circuit in cavanaugh first noted that federal law allows an individual to act as their own counsel but that generally parents "cannot appear pro se on behalf of their minor children because a minor's personal cause of action is her own and does not belong to her parent or representative.