the tax terminates at the end of 2017 . to ensure that responsible parties can be held accountable for cleanup costs and damages in the event of an oil spill ( thereby preserving the oil spill fund ) , opa requires that vessels show evidence of financial responsibility , such as insurance . the npfc carries out this mandate by issuing certificates of financial responsibility ( cofrs ) to shipping vessel owners when owners demonstrate the ability to pay for oil spill cleanup and damages . in general , vessels over 300 gross tons are required to have a valid cofr to operate in u.s. waters . the npfc also takes action to recover cleanup costs from responsible parties . it documents ongoing costs and damages from the spill area , and bills the responsible party . about 40% of spills in u.s. waters are "mystery" spills , and the costs go unrecovered . marine debris ( eg , discarded fishing lines or nets ) can endanger birds and marine animals , and cause damage to coral reefs . even less lethal trash from recreational fishing and boating ( such as beverage cans and bottles , food wrappers , and foam plastic pieces ) degrades beaches , coral reefs , and the oceans . the coast guard's approach to debris is preventive , promoting compliance by boarding and inspecting vessels , and working with local port agencies to ensure there are facilities to receive garbage from vessels . the coast guard also coordinates with the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the national marine fisheries service , the national park service , and the ocean conservancy in monitoring and measuring amounts of marine debris . this activity is authorized in the act to prevent pollution from ships , 33 u.s.c . 1905 and 1915 , as well as marpol annex v . the coast guard has a history of scientific study of the oceans dating back to 1881 , when it began arctic cruises along the alaska coast . today the coast guard's role is that of a facilitator , supporting the scientific efforts of other groups . moreover , many of the oceanographic and other scientific activities conducted by federal agencies , including the coast guard , were consolidated in 1970 with the creation of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . the coast guard operates three icebreakers in the arctic and antarctic , and provides supplies to remote stations . the coast guard also participates in the international ice patrol , which monitors iceberg danger in the northwest atlantic , particularly in the area of the grand banks of newfoundland . the iceberg season is usually from february to july , but the ice patrol is logistically flexible and can commence operations when iceberg conditions dictate . coast guard operations must comply with applicable environmental laws . ongoing initiatives include meeting the more stringent emission requirements of the clean air act amendments of 1990 , and developing strategies to minimize the generation of hazardous waste . there also are continuing efforts to design pollution prevention into shore facility improvement projects , and to conduct environmental audits at facilities to find and correct potential environmental violations .