most states prohibit any gambling that they do not expressly permit . all states except hawaii and utah authorize some form of gambling by their residents , such as lotteries , bingo , card games , slot machines , or casinos . seven states ( illinois , indiana , louisiana , montana , oregon , south dakota , and washington ) expressly outlaw internet gambling . the federal wire act , 18 u.s.c . such legalization would take advantage of uigea's "intrastate exemption" provision ; states also no longer need to be concerned about prosecution under the wire act for enacting such laws due to the recent department of justice olc opinion . 2d 650 ( 2008 ) .... we reject interactive's vagueness claim . the act prohibits a gambling business from knowingly accepting certain financial instruments from an individual who places a bet over the internet if such gambling is illegal at the location in which the business is located or from which the individual initiates the bet . thus , the act clearly provides a person of ordinary intelligence with adequate notice of the conduct that it prohibits . the appellate court noted that uigea "itself does not make any gambling activity illegal," but rather , the definition of "unlawful internet gambling" references federal and state laws related to gambling . therefore , the court suggested that "to the extent that [there is] a vagueness problem , it is not with the act , but rather with the underlying state law. uigea calls for regulations that require "each designated payment system , and all participants therein , to identify and block or otherwise prevent or prohibit restricted transactions through the establishment of policies and procedures" reasonably calculated to have that result . on october 4 , 2007 , the board of governors of the federal reserve system and the treasury department ( the agencies ) issued proposed regulations implementing uigea . some internet gambling companies , however , were undeterred by the new federal law and attempted to rely on fraudulent methods to circumvent uigea's prohibitions . yet despite their efforts to evade uigea , several of these companies have faced prosecution and been forced to shut down their operations . for example , on april 15 , 2011 , the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york announced the unsealing of an indictment of 11 defendants , including the founders of the three largest internet poker websites ( poker stars , full tilt poker , and absolute poker ) , that charged them with a variety of federal offenses including bank fraud , conspiracy , violating uigea , money laundering , and operating an illegal gambling business . for example , the offshore internet poker companies allegedly "arranged for the money received from u.s. gamblers to be disguised as payments to hundreds of non - existent online merchants purporting to sell merchandise such as jewelry and golf balls," thereby tricking u.s. banks and credit card issuers to process their payments . in addition , the indictment also accused the internet poker companies of "persuad[ing] the principals of a few small , local banks facing financial difficulties to engage in [payment] processing in return for multi - million dollar investments in the banks.