national response plans now incorporate agroterrorism . yet some in congress want additional laws or oversight to increase the level of food defense , particularly regarding interagency coordination , response and recovery leadership , and ensuring adequate border inspections . ( see crs report rl32521 , agroterrorism: threats and preparedness , by [author name scrubbed] . ) approximately 76 million people get sick and 5,000 die from food - related illnesses in the united states each year , it is estimated . congress frequently conducts oversight and periodically considers legislation on food safety and could do so again . some members continue to be interested in such issues as whether appropriate resources and safeguards are in place to limit microbiological contamination of fresh meat , poultry , and produce ; the need , if any , for stronger enforcement or recall authority ; the regulation of bioengineered foods ; human antimicrobial resistance ( which some link partly to misuse of antibiotics in animal feed ) ; and interest among some in reorganizing food safety authorities and responsibilities , possibly under a single agency . ( see crs report rl32922 , meat and poultry inspection: background and selected issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) since 2003 , highly pathogenic avian influenza ( h5n1 ) has spread from asia into europe , the middle east , and africa ; however , no cases of h5n1 have been found yet in the united states . because avian flu is highly contagious in domestic poultry and can be carried by wild birds , usda advocates stringent on - farm biosecurity . controlling avian flu in poultry is seen as the best way to prevent a human pandemic from developing . congress has responded to the threat by providing emergency and regular appropriations for surveillance , both domestically and internationally , and holding hearings covering the animal disease and food safety . further funding will be necessary for surveillance , vaccine stockpiles , and first responder equipment . ( see crs report rl33795 , avian influenza in poultry and wild birds , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) many believe that u.s. agricultural producers and food processors should improve their ability to identify and trace their products ( including animals ) through the food chain , whether to facilitate the removal of contaminated products , quickly contain animal disease outbreaks , enable consumers to verify labeling claims , and / or for country of origin labeling ( cool ) . one issue is whether a more universal animal identification system should be mandated and who should pay . another is mandatory cool for fresh red meats , produce , and peanuts , which congress required in the 2002 farm bill but has since delayed , until september 30 , 2008 . 357 would require mandatory cool implementation on september 30 , 2007. ) while some want cool to be implemented , others would prefer voluntary labeling . ( see crs report rs22526 , animal agriculture: selected issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed]. ) the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is an independent federal agency that regulates the futures trading industry . the cftc is subject to periodic reauthorization ; current authority expired on september 30 , 2005 .