but the agreement is not without controversy . many europeans argue that it is not balanced because it does not give european carriers the right to fly between u.s. cities and maintains limits on eu ownership of u.s. airlines . although most u.s. airlines support the agreement , the major u.s. unions representing pilots , machinists , flight attendants , and baggage handlers oppose it on the grounds that it will lead to a further erosion of jobs , benefits , and wages . the world trade organization's ( wto ) doha development round of multilateral trade negotiations has been suspended since july 2006 . the round , which seeks to liberalize world trade flows and provide a boost to development and the world economy , has been stymied by persistent differences among the united states , the eu , and developing countries on major issues such as agriculture and services . agreement between the eu and u.s. has been key to the conclusion of previous multilateral trade rounds . accordingly , at the 2007 summit , leaders reaffirmed their "strong desire to reach a prompt agreement ... that is ambitious , balanced , and creates meaningful new trade flows in agriculture , industrial goods , and services among and between the developed and developing countries. trade negotiators from the two sides , however , face a complicated task of getting the rest of the world to accept any agreement the united states and the eu might reach . developing countries in particular are much more vociferous in their expectations and demands than they were in previous multilateral trade talks . european leaders have made curbing global climate change an integral objective of eu energy security policy . in march 2007 , eu members established binding targets for the use of renewable energy and biofuels and committed to cut greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20% compared to 1990 levels by 2020 . building on this agreement , european officials are reportedly seeking u.s. support for an international treaty regulating greenhouse gas emissions after 2012 , when the u.n. kyoto protocol is set to expire , and for an international market - based carbon emissions credit trading system . the united states is not party to the kyoto protocol , and u.s. officials appear reluctant to commit to global regulation ; instead , they advocate transatlantic cooperation to promote alternative and clean energy technology . in light of the differences on global climate change regulation , the united states and eu used the april 2007 summit to launch initiatives jointly promoting technological advances in clean coal and carbon capture and storage , energy efficiency , biofuels , and methane recovery , among other areas . although european officials agree with the united states that these technologies should help improve transatlantic energy security and mitigate the negative effects of climate change , they are reportedly disappointed by perceived u.s. reluctance to pursue binding international emissions targets and a global carbon trading system . u.s. officials , pointing out that from 2000-2004 carbon dioxide emissions increased at a faster rate in the eu than in the united states , argue that the u.s. approach , based on fostering technological innovation as opposed to binding regulation , is proving more effective in curbing global warming .