several reasons may explain this situation . first , the concepts of "sustainable debt" and "debt overhang" may be inappropriate for the hipc countries . what impact can the mdri be expected to have on poverty reduction ? what policies could make debt relief more effective ? looking at several studies of the effectiveness of the hipc program from 1996-2006 , it appears that although debt relief can slightly increase the amount of financial resources available to poor countries , the debt burden is not the main impediment to poverty reduction and economic growth in the poorest countries . weak macroeconomic institutions and difficulty absorbing foreign assistance , as well as political challenges , appear more likely hurdles . alleviating the debt burden in the absence of other strategic reforms is unlikely to substantially contribute to improved conditions in the poorest countries . if combined with other efforts , however , debt relief can have a complementary effect on domestic government finances and can help promote further reform . the mdri builds on several bilateral and multilateral debt relief initiatives conducted over the past twenty years . in the 1980s and early 1990s , as the debts of the poorest countries increased rapidly compared to other low - income countries , the g7 and other creditor countries implemented several plans aimed at reducing the countries' debt payment burden . the eventual mdri agreement was a compromise agreement between the united states and the europeans . u.s. officials had reportedly argued that the cost of multilateral debt relief could be borne by the institutions and did not require donors' contributing any new assistance . other creditors believed the institutions should be compensated for their debt forgiveness to avoid diverting potential resources that could be lent to the poorest countries . any debt relief , they argued , should be additional to existing multilateral assistance . the compromise plan entailed the multilateral development banks receiving new money from creditor nations to offset their debt reductions while the imf would absorb the cost of debt relief using internal resources . there are numerous reasons why policy - makers support poor country debt relief . debt relief emerged as a foreign policy issue mainly through moral arguments against requiring the poorest countries to repay their debts . at a united nations conference on africa in 2004 , columbia university professor and united nations advisor jeffrey sachs remarked: "no civilized nation should try to collect the debts of people who are dying of hunger and disease and poverty. others , including the bush administration , presented what they viewed as a pragmatic argument for debt relief . they argued that debt was "locking these poorest countries into poverty and preventing them from using their own resources [for development]. by providing debt relief , they argued , resources that would have been allocated for debt repayments would now be redirected toward new investment and / or domestic social services . at a press release announcing the mdri deal , former world bank president paul wolfowitz announced that , "across africa and around the world , leaders in 38 countries will no longer have to choose between spending to benefit their people and repaying impossible debts.