forces. dod may fund other training and security assistance only if congress specifically authorizes and appropriates funds for it . especially in recent years , congress has explicitly authorized and funded substantial assistance to foreign militaries to participate in and support coalition or u.s. operations , but with a few exceptions these have remained temporary law . on the other hand , dod has over time differentiated the general purposes of section 1206 from those of the state department - funded military training and equipping through fmf and imet , with the implication that section 1206 is not strictly foreign assistance . proponents of section 1206 authority have over the years emphasized its importance as a military tool to further u.s. security objectives by responding to needs identified by the u.s. military . in contrast , they note that fmf provides funds for needs identified by the recipients and they present fmf as a political tool "critical ... for executing our foreign policy" and "key to improving bilateral relationships , encouraging behavior in the u.s. interest , increasing access and influence , and building capacity where host - nation and u.s. interests align," but not necessarily responding to needs identified by the u.s. military . ( 2 ) should section 1206 be codified as permanent law ? ( 3 ) what has been the effect of the new train and equip authority for security forces ? and ( 4 ) should congress consider broader security assistance reform ? for nearly 50 years , since the enactment of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa ) , the secretary of state has exercised the leadership role for foreign assistance , including military assistance , specifically military education and training . since then , with the exception of a period from the mid - 1960s to the mid - 1970s inclusive of the vietnam war , major foreign military assistance programs have been carried out under state department authority , oversight , and guidance , with a dod agency responsible for implementation . "traditionally the state department plans , budgets and oversees security assistance programs and is the lead agency in charge of all u.s. foreign policy and global engagement," according to a 2008 report co - sponsored by the american academy of diplomacy and the henry l. stimson center . "the dod has supported overall foreign and national security policy by implementing these programs . this relationship was designed to ensure that security assistance was aligned with general u.s. foreign policy goals. for many years , dod had little interest in security assistance activities , as they were regarded neither as a military mission nor as an activity of more than marginal value to ensuring national security . in particular , training foreign military forces was not considered a task for general purpose military forces , and for many years limited training was most often conducted by u.s. sof , often under state department authority . dod perspectives on training foreign military forces slowly began to change after the terrorist attacks on the united states of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) .