2892 propose to transfer fps to nppd . only the senate - passed version of h.r . this included processes for training , retention , and staff development . they must possess required licenses , certifications , and permits . dhs intends for fps to continue maintaining security policy and standards , conducting building security assessments , and monitoring federal agency compliance with security standards . the responsibility to protect federal buildings was established in the federal works agency in june 1948 . such events included the 2008 democratic and republican national nominating conventions , and the inauguration of president barack obama . additionally , the administration , in the fy2010 budget request , proposes to transfer fps from ice to the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) within dhs . specifically , congress authorized the federal works administrator to appoint uniformed guards as special policemen with the responsibility of "the policing of public buildings and other areas under the jurisdiction of the federal works agency. the special policemen were given the same responsibility as sheriffs and constables on federal property to enforce the laws enacted for the protection of persons and property , and to prevent "breaches of peace , suppress affrays or unlawful assemblies. on june 30 , 1949 , the federal works agency was abolished , and all of its functions , including the protection of federal buildings , were transferred to the general services administration ( gsa ) . in september 1961 , congress authorized the gsa administrator to appoint non - uniformed special policemen to: conduct investigations in order to protect property under the control of gsa ; enforce federal law to protect persons and property ; and make an arrest without a warrant for any offense committed upon federal property if a policeman had reason to believe the offense was a felony and the person to be arrested was guilty of the felony . the gsa administrator formally established the federal protective service ( fps ) in january 1971 through gsa administrative order 5440.46 . fps , as an official gsa agency , continued to protect federal property and buildings with both uniformed and non - uniformed policemen . fps was transferred to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and placed within the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , with enactment of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . the act required the dhs secretary to "protect the buildings , grounds , and property that are owned , occupied , or secured by the federal government ( including any agency , instrumentality , or wholly owned or mixed ownership corporation thereof ) and persons on the property.