for certification . the apb is a relatively new ( 2010 ) professional board that focuses on technical issues , such as recognized valuation methods and techniques . as described above , the dodd - frank act ( dfa ) made a number of changes to the regulation of property appraisals . it set new federal standards for the independence of appraisers , particularly for properties on which higher risk loans were being made . it eliminated the home valuation code of conduct ( hvcc ) . other significant provisions include a requirement of a property visit for appraisals financed by a high - risk mortgage ; conditions for a second appraisal at no cost to the home purchaser ; mandated independence for appraisers ; portability of some residential property appraisals ; rules for customary and reasonable fees ; standards for appraiser education ; and a mandatory annual report to congress by the asc on its activities . selected issues are described in more detail below . regulators issue rules for appraisals within the statutory framework . although the dodd - frank act required a number of rules related to appraisals , banking regulators had also been considering a number of changes to property valuations that they believe would support real estate transactions . the federal reserve issued an interim final rule for appraisal independence in october 2010 . although the dodd - frank act required the banking regulators to issue an interim rule on appraisals , the federal reserve had already been formulating many of the proposed changes under its truth in lending act ( tila ) authority prior to passage of the dfa . some sections of the interim rule , such as reasonable and customary fees for appraisals , are directly related to specific dodd - frank act provisions . the october 2010 rule contains five major provisions . it prohibits coercion of appraisers to influence the appraised value of properties . it prohibits appraisers and appraisal management companies having financial interests in the transaction . it prohibits lenders from providing credit if they know beforehand of violations involving appraiser coercion or conflicts of interest . it requires that lenders that have information about appraiser misconduct file reports with the appropriate state licensing authorities . it sets the standards for the payment of reasonable and customary compensation to appraisers as required by the dodd - frank act . the october 2010 rule is broad . the covered transactions that it applies to are extensions of consumer credit that are or will be secured by the consumer's principal dwelling . this includes home equity lines of credit . the rule is not limited to appraisers . it also applies to any person who makes a valuation of real estate for a covered transaction , including real estate agents . the banking regulators issued fil - 82-2010 , "interagency appraisal and evaluation guidelines," on december 2 , 2010 . the fil applies to lenders regulated by members of ffiec . fils do not apply to nonbank lenders like mortgage companies that are funded solely by securitization . the fil makes a number of substantive changes and clarifications to permitted methods of collateral valuation by banks .