— as well as to realize profits . the promotional money laundering charge was based on payments to winners and to employees — runners — of the gambling business . these payments were part of the underlying charge of operating an illegal gambling business . the defendant convicted of operating the gambling business received a 60-month sentence for the illegal gambling conviction and 210 months for the money laundering . the issue presented to the court was a straightforward question of statutory interpretation: as used in 18 u.s.c . § 1956 , does "proceeds" mean "profits" or "gross receipts ? for santos and his co - conspirators , the answer the court provided is "profits. for others , however , the answer is not clear because there is no majority opinion in the case ; there is an opinion for a plurality of four justices which is joined by a concurring opinion by a fifth justice , justice stevens , that limits the reach of the holding to a narrower ground . this means that the case may be cited as authority only for the narrow ground . complicating this , however , are two factors: ( 1 ) the plurality opinion includes language seeking to confine the meaning of justice stevens's opinion ; and ( 2 ) all of the other justices disavowed the approach taken by justice stevens . justice scalia , in the plurality opinion , writing for himself and justices souter , ginsburg , and thomas , found no way to decipher what congress intended in using the word "proceeds" in 18 u.s.c . he found that ( 1 ) there is no definition of "proceeds" in 18 u.s.c . § 1956 ; ( 2 ) the federal criminal code does not provide a consistent definition or use for the term ; ( 3 ) either "profits" or "gross receipts" would fit everywhere "proceeds' is used in the statute ; and ( 3 ) dictionaries revealed no overwhelming preference for a primary ordinary meaning of the term . declaring himself unable to resolve the ambiguity , justice scalia resorted to the rule of lenity which requires clarity in criminal statutes and ambiguities resolved in favor of defendants . he reasoned that , because "profits" is harder to prove than "gross receipts," defining "proceeds" as "profits" is more lenient towards defendants , and , therefore , it is the required interpretation in the statute . this means that , under this statute , prosecutors must prove , in addition to the other elements of the offense , that the defendant knew that the property involved in the transaction is " profits " of "some form of unlawful activity" and that the transaction involves " profits " of "specified unlawful activity. in the opinion , justice scalia seeks to dispel arguments raised by the solicitor general that defining "proceeds" as "profits" undermines the purpose of the money laundering statute — punishing concealment and promotion of illegal activities — because it does not capture all the funds generated by the illegal activity . he first asserts that the purpose of the money laundering laws might well have been eliminating the harm caused by pouring criminal profits into expanded criminal activity ( i.e. , "leveraging" profits ) .