the uniform system is brief . it does not contain model rules regarding enforcement , nor does it provide model rules specifying lengths of time after which special plates or placards must be renewed or addressing whether eligible individuals must be primary users of vehicles with special license plates . instead , it contains basic definitions and samples that the department encourages states to utilize as part of their own , more detailed , parking privilege systems . all states have laws governing parking privileges for individuals with disabilities , and nearly all states have adopted at least some portion of the department of transportation's uniform system . however , those early proposals were not reported out of their respective committees . since that time , the federal government has created guidelines for parking privileges . parking privileges for individuals with disabilities is distinct from the subject of physical accessibility of parking spaces or structures . the federal role in ensuring physical parking space accessibility is significant: under the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , a broad nondiscrimination statute , government entities , private businesses , and others must adhere to the ada standards for accessible design when re - striping existing or building new parking lots . the ada standards mandate specific percentages of van - accessible parking spaces per parking facility and require accessible aisles between certain spaces . however , the ada standards for accessible design do not require governments or other entities to reserve accessible parking spaces or issue special license plates or placards for individuals with disabilities ; nor does any other ada regulation mandate the provision of such parking privileges . therefore , any federal action on parking privileges occurs separately from federal rules on physical parking space accessibility . specifically , the initial bills proposed federal sanctions in the form of reduced highway apportionments for states that failed to recognize parking placards issued by other states or failed to implement federal rules . congress first considered federal action on parking privileges for individuals with disabilities in the mid - 1980s in response to complaints that some states did not honor parking placards for individuals with disabilities from other states . the first bills introduced during that period would have created federal guidelines and authorized penalties for states that failed to comply with those guidelines . in 1988 , congress enacted legislation requiring the department of transportation to create a "uniform system" of parking privileges for people with disabilities . accordingly , the department of transportation promulgated the "uniform system for parking for persons with disabilities. the legislation required the department to "encourage adoption of such system by all the states," but it did not require states to adopt the federal guidelines . thus , although the federal government has a strong advisory role , states have the ultimate responsibility for the development of parking privileges . the stated purpose of the department of transportation's uniform system for parking for persons with disabilities is to provide "guidelines to states for the establishment of a uniform system. thus , the uniform system provides model definitions and rules regarding eligibility , application procedures , and issuance of special license plates and placards .