the political campaign was mostly calm . exceptions included explosions at offices of the prosperous armenia party on april 11 , the arrest of two members of the opposition civic disobedience movement on money laundering charges on may 7 , and the use of police force against marchers from the impeachment bloc on may 9 , which resulted in some injuries . armenian media reported that kocharyan accused artur baghdasaryan , the head of the rule of law party , of "betrayal" for allegedly discussing with a british diplomat how the west might critique the election . under the electoral law , the parties and candidates received free air time for campaign messages . except for these opportunities , the main public and private television channels mostly covered pro - government party campaigning , and private billboard companies mostly sold space to these parties . the public radio station appeared editorially balanced . the prosperous armenia party failed to get as many votes as expected . it also was surprising that the united labor party failed to gain seats . the opposition parties ( rule of law and heritage ) won 16 seats , fewer than the opposition held in the previous legislature , although parties considered oppositionist received about one - fourth of the total popular vote . while hailing the election as "free , fair , and transparent," kocharyan on may 14 reportedly pledged that "shortcomings and violations , which took place during the elections , will be thoroughly studied in order to take necessary measures and re - establish legality," a pledge reiterated to the osce by sarkisyan on may 22 . according to the preliminary conclusions made by observers from the osce , coe , and the eu , the legislative elections "demonstrated improvement and were conducted largely in accordance with ... international standards for democratic elections. they praised an inclusive candidate registration process , dynamic campaigning in a permissive environment , extensive media coverage , and a calm atmosphere in polling places . however , they raised some concerns over pro - government party domination of electoral commissions , the low number of candidates in constituency races , and inaccurate campaign finance disclosures . observers also reported a few instances of voters apparently using fraudulent passports for identification , of vote - buying , and of individuals voting more than once . in a follow - on assessment , the osce / coe / eu observers raised more concerns that vote - counting problems could harm public confidence in the results . the inability of opposition parties to form a coalition like the former justice bloc in 2003 harmed their chances by splitting the vote . positive or neutral reports dominated in the media , according to osce / coe / eu election observers . most campaigning appeared to stress personalities rather than programs , according to many observers . to the extent issues were discussed , the focus was largely on domestic concerns such as rural development , pensions , education , jobs , and healthcare . the cec reported that almost 1.4 million of 2.3 million eligible voters turned out ( about 60% ) . the republican party of armenia gained more seats than it won in the last legislative election .