, working. the first circuit also concluded that there was no evidence that cook could not perform the job , and it upheld the district court's decision for cook . the second circuit in francis also examined claims of obesity discrimination under disability law . in this case , the city of meriden disciplined francis , a firefighter employed by the city , after he failed to meet certain weight guidelines . francis claimed that this discipline was discrimination based on a perceived disability in violation of the ada and the rehabilitation act . the court found that francis' claims failed because francis only alleged that the city disciplined him for not meeting a weight standard , not because he suffered from an impairment within the meaning of the disability statutes . it has been argued that obese individuals have been the targets of discrimination . there is no federal law that specifically prohibits obesity discrimination . however , some obese individuals have argued that their weight can be considered a disability for purposes of the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) or the rehabilitation act of 1973 and , therefore , they have legal protection against weight discrimination . courts have evaluated numerous claims of obesity discrimination brought under the ada and the rehabilitation act . congress enacted the ada in 1990 to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities . the ada prohibits discrimination based on disability in the areas of employment , public services , public accommodations , and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications . in order to prevail in a discrimination case , the plaintiff must prove , among other things , that he or she has a disability within the meaning of the ada . the ada defines "disability" with respect to an individual as " ( a ) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual [such as walking , or working] ; ( b ) a record of such an impairment ; or ( c ) being regarded as having such an impairment. the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) has promulgated ada regulations that give insight as to what constitutes an impairment within the meaning of the term "disability," as well as what is considered to be "substantially limit[ing] a major life activity. the ada regulations have been used by the courts in determining the validity of obesity discrimination claims . obesity discrimination cases have also been brought under the rehabilitation act of 1973 . section 504 of the rehabilitation act states that "no otherwise qualified individual ... shall , solely by reason of her or his disability , ... be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. courts have often applied the same standard when deciding cases arising under the ada or section 504 of the rehabilitation act . also , the standards for determining employment discrimination under the rehabilitation act are identical to those used in title i of the ada . the ada regulations address whether obesity can be an impairment that qualifies as a disability under the ada .