if the 527 reform act had been enacted , it is likely that its constitutionality would have been challenged . by requiring most 527s to register with the fec as "political committees," such groups would have been required to use only federally regulated hard money contributions to fund advertisements that promote or attack federal candidates , without regard to whether the communications expressly advocate election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate . as some interpret supreme court precedent to limit regulation through the designation of "political committee" status to only those organizations engaging in express advocacy , it is likely that litigation would have occurred . in the 110 th congress , the 527 reform act of 2007 ( h.r . campaign - related activity by entities commonly referred to as 527 groups or 527s has increased over the past several election cycles . these groups are a subset of the political organizations that qualify for tax - exempt status under section 527 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) . beginning in earnest in the late 1990s , 527 groups have funded broadcast communications that discuss the position of federal candidates on public policy issues , but carefully avoid expressly advocating for or against a candidate . although these "issue advocacy" communications are widely viewed as intending to influence elections , some argue that they are not regulated — and cannot be constitutionally regulated — by the federal election campaign act ( feca ) due to an interpretation of the supreme court's campaign finance law jurisprudence only permitting regulation of communications expressly advocating for the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate . it was also in the late 1990s that the internal revenue service ( irs ) issued several private rulings indicating that some issue advocacy activities qualify as "exempt function" activities under irc § 527 , thereby permitting these groups to qualify for § 527 status . as a result , 527 groups have been able to utilize this "regulatory gap" between the irc and feca: while their issue advocacy and campaign activities are sufficient to qualify for § 527 tax - exempt treatment , arguably , they are not sufficiently election - related to trigger regulation under feca . by the 2000 election cycle , as the campaign activity of 527s continued to grow , they were often referred to as "stealth pacs" because they were not reporting to the federal election commission ( fec ) , and only had contact with the irs if they had to file a tax return . in response , congress amended irc § 527 in 2000 and 2002 to generally require that most § 527 political organizations report information to the irs , the fec , or a state . section 527 political organizations that are not fec - regulated political committees are generally required to report to the irs their existence within 24 hours of formation and periodically disclose information on contributors who have given at least $200 during the year and expenditures made to persons who have received at least $500 during the year , in addition to annual information and tax return requirements .