for more information on h.r . 1549 and s. 619 , see crs report r40739 , antibiotic use in agriculture: background and legislation . several have weighed in with their concerns in communications with the administration . for example , the chair and the ranking republican on the senate agriculture committee sent a january 15 , 2010 , letter to the president urging him "to fully engage all administration resources to address these agricultural trade issues , especially with respect to u.s. exports of pork , poultry , and beef. other members of congress have proposed alternative measures to address these types of issues . in particular , in response to the most recent developments regarding antibiotic residues and chlorine rinses , representative slaughter has recommended that the united states take more proactive steps and consider legislation that she has introduced in h.r . 1549 ( preservation of antibiotics for medical treatment act of 2009 , pamta ) . this bill aims to curtail the use of certain medically significant antibiotics in animal production , similar to legislation enacted in other countries . a similar bill has been introduced in the senate ( s. 619 ) by senator reid ( for senator kennedy ) . these commitments would come into force upon russia's accession to the wto . the agreement allowed the united states to address a broad number of sensitive issues in its economic relations with russia , although it did not accomplish all of the original u.s. objectives . with regard to agriculture , the u.s. - russia 2006 bilateral market access agreement , or side letters , committed russia to: permitting the immediate resumption of imports of de - boned beef , bone - in beef , and beef by - products from cattle younger than 30 months and allowing imports of beef and beef by - products from cattle of all ages , once the united states received a positive evaluation as a beef producer from the world organization for animal health ; accepting safety certifications by the u.s. department of agriculture's food safety inspection service ( fsis ) of pork and poultry slaughter , processing , and cold storage facilities to export products to russia , along with procedures to expedite the certification process ; accepting u.s. freezing treatments as an adequate measure to prevent trichinae infestation in pork to be sold for retail sale as well as for further processing ( russia previously had only allowed frozen pork to be imported for further processing ) ; and continuing to apply until 2009 the provisions of the 2005 u.s. - russia bilateral agreement on meat that established tariff - rate quotas , including in - and over - quota tariff rates , and to conduct bilateral negotiations on the treatment of meat imports after the agreement expires . in december 2008 , the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announced that the united states and russia had signed a protocol to the 2005 agreement that was aimed at continuing u.s. poultry , pork , and beef exports there through the end of 2009 . the protocol adjusted previously set 2009 quota levels for poultry and pork , but did not address other issues affecting u.s. - russia livestock and poultry trade .