the court remanded the case to the district court for proceedings consistent with its opinion . the court's decidedly antiregulatory opinion in davis appears to reaffirm its finding in the landmark 1976 decision , buckley v. valeo , that congress has no compelling interest in attempting to level the playing field among candidates . in fact , the davis court determined that congressional attempts to do so would supplant the choices of the voters . for both house and senate candidates , the increased contribution limits are eliminated when parity in spending is reached between the two candidates . in 2004 and 2006 , jack davis was a candidate for the house of representatives from the 26 th congressional district of new york . during the 2004 election cycle , he spent $1.2 million , which was principally from his own funds , and during the 2006 cycle , he spent $2.3 million , which ( with the exception of $126,000 ) came from personal funds . in 2006 , after the federal election commission ( fec ) informed davis that it had reason to believe that he had violated bcra's disclosure requirements for self - financing candidates by failing to report personal expenditures during the 2004 election cycle , davis filed suit in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia seeking declaration that the millionaire's amendment was unconstitutional and an injunction preventing the fec from enforcing the law during the 2006 cycle . a district court three - judge panel concluded sua sponte that davis had standing to bring the suit , but rejected his claims on the merits and granted summary judgment to the fec . invoking bcra's provision for direct appeal to the supreme court for actions brought on constitutional grounds , davis appealed . reversing the three - judge district court decision , in a 5-to - 4 vote , the supreme court in fec v. davis invalidated the millionaire's amendment as lacking a compelling governmental interest in violation of the first amendment . justice alito wrote the opinion for the majority and was joined by chief justice roberts , and justices scalia , kennedy , and thomas . justice stevens wrote an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part , and was joined , in part , by justices souter , ginsburg , and breyer . justice ginsburg also wrote an opinion , concurring in part and dissenting in part , which was joined by justice breyer . notably , the decision also seems to be a departure from its 2003 decision in mcconnell v. fec —upholding key portions of bcra—where the court expressed deference to congress's expertise in regulating the system under which its members are elected . while justice stevens still appeared to subscribe to this view , the majority of the davis court seemed less deferential . bcra also requires self - financing candidates to file special disclosure reports regarding their campaign spending—as such expenditures are made—in addition to reporting in accordance with the regular periodic disclosure schedule . likewise for senate candidates , a separate provision generally raises individual contribution limits for a candidate whose opponent exceeds a designated threshold level of personal campaign funding that is based on the number of eligible voters in the state .