prasad , were sanctioned under the ina . the two formerly headed the nuclear power corp. of india and allegedly passed to iran heavy - water nuclear technology . surendar denied ever visiting iran and sanctions against him were ended in december 2005 . in that same december determination , two indian chemical companies were sanctioned under the ina for transfers to iran . such concerns include the proposed gas pipeline . secretary of energy sam bodman , visiting new delhi in march 2007 , reiterated u.s. opposition to the pipeline project . according to the 2006-2007 annual report of the indian ministry of external affairs , india's relations with iran are underlined by historical , civilizational and multifaceted ties . india and iran have established steady but relatively low level defense and military relations since the formation of an indo - iran joint commission in 1983 , three years after the start of the iran - iraq war . under a reportedly finalized 25-year , $22 billion deal , the state - owned gas authority of india ltd. ( gail ) is to buy 5 million tons of iranian liquified natural gas ( lng ) per year . these transfers do not appear to be part of an indian - government - directed policy of assisting iran's wmd , but could represent unauthorized scientific contacts that have resulted from growing india - iran energy and diplomatic ties . some indian persons have been sanctioned by the bush administration under the iran non - proliferation act ( ina , p.l . according to determinations published in the federal register , in 2003 an indian chemical industry consultancy was sanctioned under the iran - iraq arms nonproliferation act ( p.l . in a september 2004 determination , two indian nuclear scientists , dr. chaudhary surendar and dr. y.s.r . in august 2006 , the united states formally sanctioned two additional indian chemical firms under the ina for sensitive material transactions with iran . the firms denied any wmd - related transfers and new delhi later said the sanctions were "not justified. in february 2007 , india moved to impose restrictions on nuclear - related exports to iran in accordance with u.n. security council resolution 1737 of december 2006 . there is no evidence that india provided any significant military assistance to iran during that war , which ended in 1988 . iran reportedly received some military advice from pakistan during the conflict . following the war , iran began rebuilding its conventional arsenal with purchases of tanks , combat aircraft , and ships from russia and china . no major purchases from india were reported during this time . however , iran reportedly turned to india in 1993 to help develop batteries for the three kilo - class submarines iran had bought from russia . other u.s. officials have called the project "unacceptable," but no u.s. official has directly stated that it would be considered a violation of isa . successive administrations have considered pipeline projects that include iran as meeting the definition of "investment" in isa . india and iran are tacitly cooperating to secure their mutual interests in afghanistan . iran has perceived the sunni islamic extremism of the taliban regime as a threat to iran's shiite sect .