, infringement ) . according to the authors , private sector owners of patents permitted such infringement in academia ( with the exception of those associated with diagnostic tests in clinical trials ) "partly because it can increase the value of the patented technology. other commentators dispute these assertions . f. scott kieff , then a member of the visiting faculty at northwestern university school of law , maintains that there was no such "norm" regarding open scientific access as opposed to intellectual property protection in the basic biological science community . he notes that "experience shows that patents on inputs generally do not prevent the production of outputs" and that the availability of intellectual property protection has expanded the resources available in the biotechnology community and led to its success . bendekgey and hamlet - cox agree that there is no evidence that gene patents have caused a decrease in research as a whole in the biomedical arena or in gene therapies . a study by professors john walsh , ashish arora , and wesley cohen found little evidence that work has been curtailed due to intellectual property issues associated with research tools . scientists are able to continue research by "licensing , inventing around patents , going offshore , the development and use of public databases and research tools , court challenges , and simply using the technology without a license ( i.e. a later analysis by professors walsh , cohen , and charlene cho concluded that patents do not have a "substantial" impact upon basic biomedical research and that "none of [their] random sample of academics reported stopping a research project due to another's patent on a research input , and only about 1% of the random sample of academics reported experiencing a delay or modification in their research due to patents. however , obtaining "tangible" research inputs ( eg , actual materials ) appear to be more difficult because of competition , cost , and time issues . congress has exhibited a strong and ongoing interest in facilitating the development of new , innovative pharmaceuticals for the marketplace while reducing the cost of drugs to consumers . to date , the u.s. system of research , development , and commercialization has had a clear impact on the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries . policies pertaining to funding for research and development ( r&d ) , intellectual property protection , and cooperative ventures have played an important role in the economic success of these sectors . a critical component of many of these federal efforts concerns patents . patent ownership can provide an economic incentive for companies to take the results of research and make the often substantial investment necessary to bring new goods and services to the marketplace . the grant of a patent provides the inventor with a mechanism to capture the returns to his invention through exclusive rights on its practice for a limited time . in the pharmaceutical industry , patents are perceived as particularly important to innovation due , in part , to the ease of duplicating the invention . now with the decision in myriad , it remains to be seen what the effect may be on research and development in this area and on innovation in the health care arena .