the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-171 ) included a provision that provided mandatory funding for a healthy marriage promotion and responsible fatherhood grants program ( in title iv - a of the social security act ) . for fy2006-fy2010 , that program was provided up to $50 million per year for competitive responsible fatherhood grants . for fy2011 , funding for those fatherhood grants was increased to $75 million . since that time , $75 million in mandatory funding for this program each year has been provided through provisions in appropriations acts . most recently , for fy2017 , the authority and funding for the responsible fatherhood grants program has been provided through two continuing resolutions . these continuing appropriations are scheduled to expire on april 28 , 2017 . most responsible fatherhood programs include parenting education ; training in responsible decisionmaking , conflict resolution , and coping with stress ; mediation services for both parents ; problem - solving skills ; peer support ; and job - training opportunities . grantees include states , territories , indian tribes and tribal organizations , and public and nonprofit community groups ( including religious organizations ) . both federal and state policymakers have maintained that denial of visitation rights should not be considered a reason for stopping child support payments . however , in recognition of the negative long - term consequences for children associated with the absence of their noncustodial parent , as well as evidence that contact between the child and noncustodial parent can make it more likely that child support responsibilities will be met , federal and state policymakers have increasingly promoted efforts that address child support and access and visitation in the same forum . in order to promote visitation and better relations between custodial and noncustodial parents , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-193 ) provided mandatory spending in the amount of $10 million each fiscal year from the federal cse budget account for grants to states for access and visitation programs . some responsible fatherhood programs help noncustodial parents strengthen their parenting skills . other programs try to discourage young men from becoming fathers until they are married and ready for the responsibility . eligible activities include but are not limited to mediation , counseling , education , development of parenting plans , visitation enforcement , and development of guidelines for visitation and alternative custody arrangements . the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l . child support payments collected by cse agencies increased from $1 billion in fy1978 to $28.6 billion in fy2015 . over the same period , the number of children whose paternity was established or acknowledged increased from 111,000 to 1.484 million . however , the program still collects only 20% of child support obligations for which it has responsibility if payments on past - due child support ( i.e. , "arrearages" ) are taken into account ( otherwise , 65% ) and collects payments for only 61% of its caseload . state domestic relations or family laws almost universally treat child support and visitation as completely separate issues .