this percentage varied from state to state . in three states ( california , new york , and connecticut ) and the district of columbia , the gses purchased less than 30% of new mortgages . in 15 states , on the other hand , the two gses purchased more than 40% of new mortgages . in high - cost areas , the gses' mortgage purchase and securitization operations are constrained by the conforming loan limit . loans that exceed the conforming loan limits can only be securitized by non - gse issuers , and prior to the recent recession , there was a large secondary market for jumbo mortgage loans . in 2006 , total prime jumbo loan originations were estimated at $480 billion , while $219 billion in prime jumbo mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) were issued , implying a securitization rate for jumbo mortgages of 45.6% . by contrast , fannie and freddie securitized 83% of loans originated in 2006 in the conventional , conforming mortgage markets where they are allowed to operate . conforming mortgage loans tend to carry lower interest rates than nonconforming loans . a number of studies have attempted to measure the spread between conforming mortgage and jumbo loan rates and the extent to which the rate differential can be attributed to the subsidy contained in gse status . most estimates of the spread between conforming and jumbo loans have fallen into the range of 18-60 basis points . ( a basis point is one one - hundredth of a percent. ) all researchers assume that at least part of this spread is due to the gse subsidy , but other factors are involved . for example , as properties become more expensive , lenders worry more about price volatility . that is , as the risk of a significant drop in the market value of the house — the loan's collateral — increases , lenders raise rates to compensate for that risk . second , the existing jumbo secondary market cannot realize certain economies of scale because market participants are largely frozen out of the conforming loan market ( due to their inability to compete with the gses ) . these and other factors suggest that allowing the gses into the jumbo market would not cause the entire spread to disappear . there is no consensus as to how much of the 18-60 basis point spread is due to the gse subsidy — estimates range as low as 4 basis points . thus , it is uncertain how significant the benefits would be if the conforming loan limit were increased during normal times . as a rough guide to the size of potential savings , assume that the interest rate on a 30-year , 4.00% mortgage is reduced to 3.75% . over the 10-year average life of a mortgage , the savings would be about $10,750 , or approximately $90 per month . of course , this figure shrinks if some portion of the rate spread persists , if , that is , not all the savings are passed through to borrowers .