individual committees may establish their own additional requirements . committees of jurisdiction must use their discretion to decide what constitutes an earmark . definitions in house rules , as well as past earmark designations during the 110 th congress , may provide guidance in determining if a certain provision constitutes an earmark . the administrative responsibilities associated with these rules vary by chamber . this report outlines the major administrative responsibilities of members and committees of the house of representatives associated with the chamber's earmark disclosure rules . house rule xxi , clause 9 , generally requires that certain types of measures be accompanied by a list of congressional earmarks , limited tax benefits or limited tariff benefits that are included in the measure or its report , or a statement that the proposition contains no earmarks . depending upon the type of measure , the list or statement is to be either included in the measure's accompanying report or printed in the congressional record . rule xxi , clause 9 , explicitly defines congressional earmark , limited tax benefit , and limited tariff benefit as follows: congressional earmark - a provision or report language included primarily at the request of a member , delegate , resident commissioner , or senator providing , authorizing or recommending a specific amount of discretionary budget authority , credit authority , or other spending authority for a contract , loan , loan guarantee , grant , loan authority , or other expenditure with or to an entity , or targeted to a specific state , locality or congressional district , other than through a statutory or administrative formula driven or competitive award process . limited tax benefit - ( 1 ) any revenue - losing provision that ( a ) provides a federal tax deduction , credit , exclusion , or preference to 10 or fewer beneficiaries under the internal revenue code of 1986 , and ( b ) contains eligibility criteria that are not uniform in application with respect to potential beneficiaries of such provision ; or ( 2 ) any federal tax provision which provides one beneficiary temporary or permanent transition relief from a change to the internal revenue code of 1986 . limited tariff benefit - a provision modifying the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states in a manner that benefits 10 or fewer entities . if either the list of earmarks or the letter stating that no earmark exists in the measure is absent , a point of order may lie against the measure's floor consideration . also not subject to the rule are floor amendments ( except a "manager's amendment" ) , amendments between the houses , or amendments considered as adopted under a self - executing special rule , including a committee amendment in the nature of a substitute made in order as original text . the point of order applies only in the absence of such a list or letter and does not speak to the completeness or the accuracy of either document . a point of order may lie against the consideration of any general appropriations conference report containing earmarks that are included in conference reports but not committed to conference by either house and not in a house or senate committee report on the legislation .