terrorist groups have also operated from albania . at the same time , opposition to terrorism among indigenous muslims in the balkans has been strong . most view themselves as part of europe and are grateful for the u.s. role in defending them against serbian aggression in the 1990s . u.s. officials say that efforts by islamist extremists to recruit local muslims have met with limited success , and they praise these countries' anti - terrorism efforts , especially after september 11 . nevertheless , some experts assert that central and southeastern europe may pose a more significant threat than often acknowledged . the region's weak governing institutions and problems with organized crime and corruption may make it vulnerable to infiltration by terrorist groups . observers caution that the balkans in particular may play a role as a transit point for terrorists , a target area for recruitment , and a potential source of weapons or explosives . the november 2004 murder of dutch filmmaker theo van gogh brought the issue of islamist extremism in europe to the forefront of european political debate . van gogh , an outspoken critic of the treatment of women in islam , was killed by a 27-year - old dutch citizen of moroccan descent and a follower of radical islam . since the murder , many european officials and social commentators have proclaimed that multiculturalism in europe has failed , and called for greater integration of muslims and other immigrants into mainstream european society . they believe that muslims and others must embrace the native cultures of their new countries , including secularism . some european governments have been pursuing initiatives aimed at fostering integration and promoting secularism for several years . the french government , for example , has banned "conspicuous" religious symbols in public schools , including headscarves for muslim girls , yarmulkes , and large crucifixes . moderate muslim groups in france supported the ban as a means to reduce tensions in the school system and in broader society . the uk is introducing new citizenship classes to ensure that immigrants can speak english and understand british history and culture . other analysts say that countries such as spain , italy , and germany need to do more to encourage muslim immigrants to become citizens . some european governments are trying to encourage moderate muslim political voices and promote a greater role for them . also notable are european union ( eu ) efforts to boost police and judicial cooperation , enhance intelligence - sharing , and strengthen external eu border controls . security and border control services in new eu members in central and eastern europe , although not quite as effective as their western counterparts , are also improving as they seek to meet eu standards . in addition , the eu has been working to encourage good integration practices among its 27 member states and prevent radicalization . law enforcement challenges remain throughout europe , as elsewhere . long - standing traditions against intelligence - sharing , rivalries among the various local and national security services , and different national laws continue to impede more robust eu cooperation .