no action was taken on the president's proposal . although the medicare trustees issued warnings each year from 2007 through 2013 , no additional legislative proposals have been submitted to congress pursuant to section 802 . since the medicare trustees did not issue funding warnings in their 2014 , 2015 , 2016 , or 2017 reports , the president was not required to submit related legislation subsequent to the submission of his fy2015 through fy2019 budgets . however , as the medicare trustees issued a funding warning in their 2018 report , the mma provides that the president will be required to submit a responsive legislative proposal after the release of his fy2020 budget . the recommendation clause provides that the president "shall from time to time give to the congress information of the state of the union , and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient. courts have rarely been presented with the opportunity to interpret the scope of this clause . however , the text of the clause , read in conjunction with analogous case law , does not appear to support an interpretation that would prevent congress from directing the president to submit legislative recommendations . the clause is perhaps most accurately characterized as establishing a right as opposed to a substantive source of authority — ensuring that the president may submit directly to congress legislative proposals that he views as "necessary and expedient. thus , this right would appear only to be infringed where congress prevents the president from submitting his own legislative proposal or attempts to dictate the contents of a required legislative proposal . under this reading , it is unlikely that congress imposes an excessive burden on the president where it merely directs the president to submit a proposal , the contents of which remain within the president's discretion , in response to a specific trigger . whereas the department of justice may assert that "any bill purporting to require the submission of recommendations is unconstitutional," no judicial decision has accepted such a broad proposition . in any year in which the mma requires the president to submit draft medicare funding legislation , the act directs that in each chamber , within three days of session after the proposal is received , the two floor leaders ( or their designees ) introduce a bill reflecting it , with the title "a bill to respond to a medicare funding warning. this measure , or , under certain circumstances , an alternative medicare funding measure , is potentially subject to consideration under fast track rules established by the statute , rather than under the regular rules and procedures that govern consideration of legislation in the two chambers . these expedited procedures place limits on committee consideration , as well as potentially on members' ability to debate and amend legislation on the floor and to offer certain motions that would otherwise be in order . these procedures are designed to guarantee that each house will have an opportunity to consider legislation to respond to the funding warning .