in congress , h.r . 1977 and s. 739 would require the cpsc to study and test drywall imported from china in 2004-2007 , analyze its composition , determine the impact that chemicals and organic compounds in the drywall had on metal items in homes as well as potential health effects , and to issue an interim ban on drywall products deemed to constitute a substantial product hazard . in addition , s.res . 91 would call on the cpsc to initiate a formal proceeding to investigate drywall imported from china in 2004-2007 , prohibit the further importation of drywall and associated building products from china , order a recall of hazardous chinese drywall , and to seek civil penalties against the drywall manufacturers in china that produced or distributed hazardous drywall and their subsidiaries in the united states to cover the cost of the recall effort and other associated remediation efforts . table 1 lists various products imported from china in 2008 that have been the subject of u.s. health and safety concerns over the past few years , such as toys , seafood , tires , animal foods , organic chemicals and pharmaceuticals , and toothpaste . such shipments will be detained until they are proven to be free of contaminants . on january 25 , 2008 , the fda posted on its website a notice by baxter healthcare corporation that it had temporarily halted the manufacture of its multiple - dose vials of heparin ( a blood thinner ) for injection because of recent reports of serious adverse events ( including an estimated 81 deaths and hundreds of complications ) associated with the use of this drug . on february 18 , 2008 , the new york times reported that a chinese firm that produces an active ingredient used to produce heparin was not certified by the chinese government to make the drug and had not undergone fda inspection ; many have speculated that the chinese plant is likely the source of the problem . on september 12 , 2008 , the fda issued a health information advisory on infant formula in response to reports of contaminated milk - based infant formula manufactured and sold in china , and later issued a warning on other products containing milk imported from china . on november 12 , 2008 , the fda issued a new alert stating that all products containing milk imported from china would be detained unless proven to be free of melamine . the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) in june 2007 was informed by foreign tire sales inc. , an importer of foreign tires , that it suspected that up to 450,000 tires ( later reduced to 255,000 tires ) made in china may have a major safety defect ( i.e. , missing or insufficient gum strip inside the tire ) . the company was ordered by the nhtsa to issue a recall . the chinese government and the manufacturer have maintained that the tires in question meet or exceed u.s. standards . the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) has issued alerts and announced voluntary recalls by u.s. companies on numerous products made in china .