successive u.s . administrations and many members of congress have supported efforts to enhance u.s. - eu cooperation against terrorism since the 2001 attacks on the united states . although some skeptics initially worried that such u.s. - eu collaboration could weaken strong u.s. bilateral law enforcement relationships with eu member states , the george w. bush administration essentially determined that the political benefits of engaging the eu as an entity on police and judicial matters outweighed the potential risks given europe's role as a key u.s. law enforcement partner . they also hoped that improved u.s. - eu cooperation on border controls and transport security would help authorities on both sides keep better track of suspected terrorists and prevent them from entering the united states or finding sanctuary in europe . at the same time , observers note that u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation is complicated by different eu and member state competencies , and u.s. policy preferences . an increasing number of policy areas relevant to counterterrorism — including data protection , customs , and visas — fall under the competence of the union ( i.e. , eu members adopt a common policy , agree to abide by its terms , and negotiate collectively with other countries ) . however , at times , the united states continues to prefer to negotiate on some issues — such as the visa waiver program — bilaterally , and observers assert that this disconnect can lead to frictions in the u.s. - eu relationship . despite periodic tensions , both the united states and the eu appear committed to fostering closer cooperation in the areas of counterterrorism , law enforcement , border controls , and transport security . as noted previously , the obama administration has largely continued the bush administration's policy of engagement with the eu in these areas . u.s. - eu cooperation against terrorism is increasingly viewed as key to combating potential threats posed by european and american citizens fighting with islamist groups in syria , iraq , and elsewhere . aviation and cargo security , u.s border control measures , and visa policy may continue to be salient issues for congress that could affect how future u.s. - eu cooperation evolves . in the 113 th and 114 th congresses , several hearings have focused all or in part on the potential threats posed by western foreign fighters in syria and iraq . as noted previously , congress passed the visa waiver program improvement and terrorist travel prevention act of 2015 ( as part of p.l . 114-113 ) in an effort to strengthen the vwp's security controls in response to growing concerns about european citizens fighting with or inspired by the islamic state and other terrorist groups . congressional decisions related to intelligence - gathering reforms and data privacy and protection issues may also have significant implications for u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation in the years ahead . possible changes to the laws that govern u.s. surveillance activity will be closely watched in europe . as discussed above , eu officials have welcomed passage of the u.s . judicial redress act ( p.l .