it joined both of them in 2004 . latvia continues to try to bring its armed forces up to nato standards , spending the 2% of gdp recommended by nato . latvia lags behind most eu members in many areas , and receives substantial eu funding to address such issues as border security , public infrastructure , and the environment . latvia has had to put off plans to adopt the euro as its currency until at least 2012 or 2013 , due to an inflation rate well above the eu's strict criteria for euro zone membership . latvia enjoys a close relationship with its baltic neighbors and the nordic countries . it has acted as an advocate for democratic and pro - western forces in belarus , ukraine , moldova , georgia , and other countries bordering russia . his election was a surprise to many latvians . he was reportedly a compromise choice of the ruling coalition when they could not agree on other candidates . latvia and the united states are concerned about the north european gas pipeline project , which will transit the baltic sea floor between russia and germany , bypassing central european countries . latvian and u.s. officials have called for the establishment of a variety of energy supply routes between the caspian sea region and europe , in order to provide greater energy security to latvia and other countries in the region . russia has reduced the role of latvia in its oil transit trade . the russian - government controlled transneft oil pipeline company cut off all oil shipments to the latvian oil terminal at the port of ventspils , after having decreased shipments in late 2002 . the move was a blow to latvia , as ventspils has been important to its economy . transneft diverted the oil shipments to its own baltic pipeline system and the russian port of primorsk , which it controls . he had no prior political affiliation or experience before his election . although the latvian presidency has few powers in latvia's parliamentary system , the president plays an important rule in representing latvia abroad and symbolizing the state's moral principles rather than narrow party interests . his predecessor , vaira vike - freiberga , was widely believed to have fulfilled these functions very well , and was latvia's most popular politician until term limits forced her retirement . zatlers's reputation suffered a blow shortly after his election , when it emerged that he had taken gratuities from his patients and had not paid taxes on those payments . he said that he had forgotten to report the income and paid the taxes . however , he may have recovered his position somewhat by criticizing the government during the loskutovs affair . after reestablishing its independence in 1991 , latvia's key foreign policy goals were to join nato and the european union . latvia supported the unsuccessful efforts of ukraine and georgia to receive a membership action plan at the april 2008 nato summit in bucharest . it supported the summit communique's commitment to eventual ukrainian and georgian membership in nato . latvia and russia have had sometimes difficult relations .