origin. after the sharp decline in 2009 , u.s. hog imports were stable at about 5.7 million - 5.8 million head for 2010-2012 . in 2013 , hog imports declined 12% to about 5 million head , and remained at that level in 2014 . canadian hog inventories have declined from the mid - 2000s level resulting in tighter hog supplies available for export to the united states . however , as with the cattle markets , record high hog prices in 2014 encouraged feeder pig imports . appendix d. wto findings the key wto findings that u.s . cool regulations violated u.s. wto obligations centered on article 2.1 and article 2.2 of the technical barriers to trade ( tbt ) agreement . article 2.1 states that "members shall ensure that... products imported from the territory of any member shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products of national origin.... " article 2.2 states that "technical regulations [such as cool] shall not be more trade - restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate objective. this section summarizes key wto findings of the dispute settlement panel , the appellate body , the compliance panel , and the appellate body on the compliance panel . the first two sections describe the key rulings on articles 2.1 and 2.2 of the technical barriers to trade ( tbt ) . the last two sections summarize issues that were before the dispute settlement panel , but were not key in the appeal and compliance processes . cool treats imported livestock less favorably than domestic livestock dispute panel the ds panel found that canada and mexico demonstrated that cool is a technical regulation governed by , and in violation of , article 2.1 of the tbt . the ab upheld this finding , but for different reasons ( see below ) . this tbt article states: "members shall ensure that in respect of technical regulations , products imported from the territory of any member shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products of national origin and to like products originating in any other country. the panel first found that the cool statute and the final rule ( but not the vilsack letter ) are a "technical regulation" because they are legally enforceable requirements governing the labeling of meat products offered for sale . the panel further found that canadian and u.s. cattle , canadian and u.s. hogs , and mexican and u.s. cattle are "like products," and the muscle cut labels used to implement cool affect competitive conditions for these products in the u.s. market to the detriment of imported livestock . according to the panel , cool creates this "competitive advantage" by creating an incentive for "processing exclusively domestic livestock and a disincentive against handling imported livestock. more specifically , the panel found that to comply with cool , processors need to segregate imported from domestic livestock to an extent that discourages them from using imported livestock at all . in turn , this reduces the competitive opportunities for imported livestock relative to those for domestic livestock . the panel based this conclusion on its assessment of the compliance requirements of cool .