numerous programs were begun , and only a very few saw completion to deployment . signed in may 1972 , the anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty prohibited the deployment of abm systems for the defense of the nations' entire territory . it permitted each side to deploy limited abm systems at two locations , one centered on the nation's capital and one at a location around icbm silo launchers . when it became clear that neither nation would complete a second site , the two sides agreed in a 1974 protocol that each would have only one abm site , located either at the nation's capital or around an icbm deployment area . each abm site could contain no more than 100 abm launchers and 100 abm interceptor missiles . the treaty also specified that in the future any radars that provided early warning of strategic ballistic missile attack had to be located on the periphery of the national territory and oriented outward . events over the past two decades contributed to strengthen these views . the collapse of the soviet union in the early 1990s heightened concerns about the possibility of an accidental or unauthorized launch of ballistic missiles from the remnants of that nation . the persian gulf war in 1991 , with iraq's use of scud missiles , proved to many that the growing threat posed by ballistic missiles had to be addressed . the proliferation of ballistic missile technologies , including sales from nations such as china , russia , and north korea to nations such as iran , syria , and pakistan became more worrisome to many . finally , many also argue that some u.s. adversaries , such as north korea and iran , are developing longer - range missiles that might reach the united states , or threaten u.s. military forces deployed abroad , as well as u.s. friends and allies . but interest in missile defense stretches back much further than the 1980s . in fact , efforts to counter ballistic missiles have been underway since the dawn of the missile age at the close of world war ii . technical obstacles have proven to be tenacious , and systems integration challenges have been more the norm , rather than the exception . since 1985 , the united states has spent more than $120 billion on a range of bmd efforts . in 2004 , the united states deployed a small - scale national - level missile defense , which is still being tested but considered by most military leaders to be operationally effective . this short report provides a brief overview of the history of the bmd efforts undertaken to defend the united states . it begins with a brief summary of the provisions of the 1972 abm treaty , which shaped most of the history of the u.s. bmd effort , and includes a short review of u.s. programs leading to the current program . negotiations with the soviet union on the anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty began in november 1969 .