elsewhere. the district to which section 3238 refers includes the districts of the u.s. district courts in the territories , but does not include the geographical confines of the other courts of the u.s. territories that have not been designated "district courts. the district in which a defendant is first arrested for purposes of section 3228 is the district "where the defendant is first restrained of his liberty in connection with the offense charged . thus , venue in a particular district by operation of section 3238 is no less proper because the defendant was initially arrested in another district under another charge , or because he entered the united states in another district prior to his indictment in the district of columbia and subsequent arrest . conversely , venue is not proper in a second district after an accused has been arrested for the extraterritorial offense in another district . the "last known address" or district of columbia basis for venue under section 3238 is an alternative basis for venue over an extraterritorial offense available to the exclusion of venue elsewhere when the offender has not first been arrested in or brought to another district . in the case of multiple co - defendants , venue over an extraterritorial offense is proper for all offenders in any district in which it is proper for one of them . venue is no less proper because the authorities arranged for the arrest of a co - defendant within a particular district . there is another , alternative venue statute for certain espionage related cases , section 3239: the trial for any offense involving a violation , begun or committed upon the high seas or elsewhere out of the jurisdiction of any particular state or district , of — ( 1 ) section 793 , 794 , 798 , [espionage] or section 1030 ( a ) ( 1 ) [obtaining classified information by unauthorized computer access] of this title ; ( 2 ) section 601 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c . 421 ) [disclosure of the identities of covert agents] ; or ( 3 ) section 4 ( b ) or 4 ( c ) of the subversive activities control act of 1950 ( 50 u.s.c . 783 ( b ) or ( c ) ) [receipt of classified information by foreign agents] ; may be in the district of columbia or in any other district authorized by law . section 3239 affords the government the option to bring an exterritorial espionage case in the district of columbia when it would otherwise be precluded from doing so under section 3238 . section 3238 permits the government to bring an extraterritorial espionage case in the district of columbia if the offender's residence is unknown . if the offender's last address in this country is known , section 3238 requires that the case be brought there or in the district in which the offender is first arrested or brought or any other district in which venue is otherwise proper . shall be by jury . section 3239 changes that . for prejudice : while the constitution promises the accused a trial in the district in which the offense was committed , it also promises him a trial by an impartial jury .