circuit . circuit rejected 2-1 the challenge to epa's denial . the two judges voting to reject did so for different reasons , however . one judge agreed with epa that the section 202 phrase "in his judgment" allows the agency to inject policy considerations into its decision whether to regulate vehicle emissions — for example , the administration's preference for economic incentives over regulatory mandates . the other judge held that petitioners had not suffered the injury requisite for federal - court standing , a ubiquitous issue in global warming litigation . the supreme court decided 5-4 in favor of the petitioner states and environmental groups , reversing the court below . at the outset , the majority opinion by justice stevens held that petitioners had standing , explaining that the required "injury in fact" for standing was provided by massachusetts's loss of shoreland through global - warming - induced sea level rise , and that states seeking to establish standing in federal court are entitled to "special solicitude. on the merits , the court held that caa section 202 empowers epa to regulate emissions from new motor vehicles based on their global warming impacts , the statute being "unambiguous" on this score . also , epa may not inject policy considerations into its decision to reject regulating such emissions , as the agency had done . the section 202 phrase "in his judgment" was not "a roving license to ignore the statutory text" ; epa's judgment must relate to whether an air pollutant might endanger public health and welfare . in the first scenario , there is government compulsion : a liable party ( such as the site owner ) waits for epa to clean up the site and then demand reimbursement , or epa orders the liable party to do the cleanup itself . in either case , the liable party , if made to pay more than its fair share , may turn around and sue other parties made liable by cercla in a "contribution" action . in the second scenario , the liable party cleans up voluntarily — that is , without waiting for a government cleanup order or cost - recovery effort — and then seeks reimbursement from other cercla - liable parties . two cercla provisions authorize , or arguably authorize , such actions , and their relationship has been heavily litigated . cercla section 113 ( f ) ( 1 ) authorizes liable parties to seek contribution from other liable parties "during or following" an epa action seeking a cleanup or reimbursement order . cercla section 107 ( a ) ( b ) makes liable parties responsible for necessary costs of response incurred by private entities . the majority view in the lower - court decisions is that liable parties may invoke only section 113 ( f ) ( 1 ) , while innocent parties must use section 107 ( a ) ( b ) . in cooper industries , inc. v. aviall services , inc .