in other words , h.r . 654 would grandfather in existing rifles , but would ban their further transfer . it is a felony to receive , possess , or transfer an unregistered nfa firearm . such offenses are punishable by a fine of up to $250,000 , imprisonment for up to 10 years , and forfeiture of the firearm and any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft used to conceal or convey the firearm . to deal in nfa firearms , a person is required to be a federal firearms licensee ( ffl ) under the gca and also be a special occupational taxpayer ( sot ) under the nfa . class one sots are importers of nfa firearms ; class two sots are manufacturers of nfa firearms ; and class three sots are dealers . nfa firearms are often referred to as class three weapons , for class three dealers . the nfa imposes a $200 manufacturing tax and a $200 transfer tax each time a firearm changes hands . upon a transfer's approval , atf places a tax stamp on the tax paid transfer document . the transferee may not take possession of the firearm until he holds the approved transfer document . private persons , who are not otherwise prohibited by law , may acquire an nfa firearm in one of three ways: ( 1 ) a registered owner of an nfa firearm may apply for atf approval to transfer the firearm to another person residing in the same state or to a ffl in another state ; ( 2 ) an individual may apply to atf for approval to make and register an nfa firearm ( except machine - gun ) ; or ( 3 ) an individual may inherit a lawfully registered nfa firearm . congress could consider several options for dealing with long - range .50 caliber rifles . one , congress could take no action . two , congress could require that such rifles be registered under the nfa , as would senator feinstein's proposal ( s. 935 ) . three , congress could ban their further production for the civilian gun market , as would representative moran's proposal ( h.r . four , congress could also ban any further transfer of these firearms — effectively eliminating these weapons from the civilian gun market in time , as would h.r . five , these weapons could be banned outright , a scenario under which , congress could also consider compensating owners for turning such firearms over to the federal government . six , congress could also consider recalling all existing armor piercing / incendiary .50 caliber bmg ammunition still available in the civilian gun market . gun control advocates have reported that long - range .50 caliber rifles could be used by terrorists in several deadly scenarios . according to the violence policy center , given the range and power of a .50 caliber bmg round , a rifle chambered to fire this round could be used to bring down a slow / low - flying aircraft . it is also plausible , that a terrorist using such a rifle could punch holes in pressurized chemical tanks , igniting combustible materials or leaking hazardous gases .