the agency does the same for the vertical competitive effects and efficiencies . in this portion of the analysis , the commission generally examines whether the merger will concentrate power in the hands of the merging parties in such a way that consumers could be harmed by , for example , increased prices , decreased services , or the exit of competitors from the marketplace . after evaluating potential competitive effects , the commission examines claimed public interest benefits of a proposed transaction , such as the potential provision of new programming or services , lower prices for services , increased service coverage , etc . the public interest benefits must be transaction - specific , meaning that "the claimed benefit must be likely to be accomplished as a result of the transaction but be unlikely to be realized by other means that entail fewer anticompetitive effects. this standard does not mean that the claimed benefit must be nearly impossible absent a merger . rather , the benefit must be unlikely to occur absent a merger . the claimed benefits must be supported by evidence and , in order to be in the public interest , the effects of the claimed benefits must flow through to consumers and not inure solely to the merging entities . the commission weighs these benefits against the potential harms to the public interest using a "sliding scale approach. in this approach , where potential harms seem likely to occur , applicants must show that the claimed benefits are of a higher degree of magnitude and likelihood than when potential harms appear less likely . if the commission's analysis suggests that the parties have shown that the merger , on balance , benefits the public interest , the commission generally approves the transfer without condition . if the commission determines that the proposed merger will harm competition or the public interest , the commission may either designate the proposed transaction for hearing , or may negotiate with the parties to place voluntary conditions on the transaction to alleviate those harmful effects . in most instances , the commission and the parties choose to negotiate . the commission finds its authority to negotiate and enforce voluntary conditions on license transfers under ยง303 ( r ) of the communications act , which grants the commission the authority to "prescribe such restrictions and conditions , not inconsistent with the law , as may be necessary to carry out the provisions" of the act , and ยง214 ( c ) , which grants the commission the power to place "such terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience and necessity may require" on the certificates the agency issues pursuant to its license transfer review authority . the parties and the commission may agree to any condition upon the proposed transfer that is tailored to mitigate the specific harms anticipated by the commission's review .