the lower courts have dealt with a number of direct threat cases under the ada . although a comprehensive survey of these cases is beyond the scope of this report , they have involved a number of types of disabilities as well as varying occupations and accommodations . the disabilities at issue have often involved aids or hiv infection or mental illness but have also included hepatitis , and other conditions . the various occupations have included public health care workers , public safety officers , transportation operators , food handlers , and industrial workers . each contagious disease has specific patterns of transmission that affect the magnitude and duration of a potential threat to others . the department of justice issued amended regulations for titles ii and iii of the ada which were published in the federal register on september 15 , 2010 . although these regulations did not directly address contagious diseases , they did contain some revised language concerning the direct threat exception . the threshold issue when discussing the applicability of the ada is whether the individual in question is a person with a disability . generally , individuals with serious contagious diseases would most likely be considered individuals with disabilities . however , this does not mean that an individual with a serious contagious disease would have to be hired or given access to a place of public accommodation if such an action would place other individuals at a significant risk . such determinations are highly fact specific and the differences between the contagious diseases discussed by the courts ( eg , hiv infection , tuberculosis , and hepatitis ) and pandemic influenza may give rise to differing conclusions . both the title ii and title iii regulations provide that public entities or places of public accommodations are not required to permit an individual to participate in services or activities when that individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others . in determining whether an individual poses a direct threat , both titles require "an individualized assessment , based on reasonable judgment that relies on current medical knowledge or on the best available objective evidence , to ascertain: the nature , duration , and severity of the risk ; the probability that the potential injury will actually occur ; and whether reasonable modifications of policies , practices , or procedures or the provision of auxiliary aids or services will mitigate the risk. due to concern about the spread of highly contagious diseases such as the 2009 h1n1 pandemic influenza and extensively drug - resistant tuberculosis ( xdr - tb ) , questions have been raised about the application of the ada in such situations . the americans with disabilities act , often described as the most sweeping nondiscrimination legislation since the civil rights act of 1964 , provides protections against discrimination for individuals with disabilities .