"protectionism. although china has attempted to diversify its large foreign exchange holdings and to make its currency more convertible in international exchange markets ( such as through currency swap arrangements with various countries ) , it is unlikely ( at least in the near term ) to make major changes to its heavy reliance on the dollar as its main source of foreign exchange reserves ( and investments in dollar - denominated assets ) , nor is china in a position to make its currency fully convertible in international exchange rate markets ( due to the relative weakness of its banking system ) . however , chinese officials are deeply concerned over the security of their dollar holdings if the dollar undergoes a sharp depreciation against major currencies in the future ( possibly arising from rising u.s. public debt ) . such concerns may also spur the chinese government to take more steps to promote domestic consumption , and lessen dependence on trade and fdi flows , as a source of economic growth . numerous sectors were hard hit . to illustrate: the real estate market in several chinese cities experienced a sharp slowdown in construction , falling prices and growing levels of unoccupied buildings . this increased pressure on the banks to lower interest rates further to stabilize the market . the value of china's main stock market index , the shanghai stock exchange composite index , lost nearly two - thirds of its value from december 31 , 2007 , to december 31 , 2008 . china's trade and fdi plummeted sharply , as indicated in figure 2 . exports and imports from january - july 2009 were down 22.0% and 23.6% , respectively on a year - on - year basis ; they declined 10 straight months beginning in november 2008 . fdi flows to china from january - july 2009 were down 20.4% ; they declined for 10 consecutive months beginning in october 2008 ( year - on - year basis ) . the chinese government in january 2009 estimated that 20 million migrant workers alone had lost their jobs in 2008 because of the global economic slowdown . during the first four months of 2009 , industrial output rose by 5.5% year - on - year , well below the 12.9% growth rate in 2008 . china has taken a number of steps to respond to the global financial crisis . on september 27 , 2008 , chinese premier wen jiabao reportedly stated that "what we can do now is to maintain the steady and fast growth of the national economy , and ensure that no major fluctuations will happen . that will be our greatest contribution to the world economy under the current circumstances. in addition to cutting interest rates and boosting bank lending , china has implemented a number of policies to stimulate and rebalance the economy , increase consumer spending , restructure and subsidize certain industries , and boost incomes for farmers and rural poor .