the returns of these partnerships are generally taxed as capital gains . in addition , the tax rules for partnerships allow sufficient flexibility to accommodate many economic arrangements , such as special allocations of income or loss among the partners . general and limited partners are compensated when the investment yields a positive return . this income , as mentioned above , is not taxed at the partnership level ; only the individual partners pay taxes , usually at the capital gains rate . general partners may also contribute capital . according to a george w. bush administration official , tax considerations likely motivate the organization of private equity and hedge funds as partnerships . in general , partnerships do not pay the corporate income tax and , instead , pass all of their gains and losses on to the partners . in addition , the general partners typically receive additional compensation from the limited partners . compensation structures may vary from fund to fund , but the standard pay formula is called "2 and 20. . most private equity and hedge funds are organized as partnerships . for tax purposes , a partnership is broadly defined to include two or more individuals who jointly engage in a for - profit business activity . they typically consist of general partners ( who actively manage the partnership ) , and limited partners ( who contribute capital ) . the "2" represents a fixed management fee ( 2% ) that does not depend upon the performance of the fund . it is characterized as ordinary income for the general partner and is taxed at ordinary income tax rates . the "20" is a share of the profits from the assets under management ( 20% ) . this portion of the general partners' compensation is commonly referred to as the carried interest . selecting this form of compensation aligns the interests of both the limited and general partners toward achieving a positive return on investment . analysts generally base their characterization of carried interest upon the degree to which the general partners' own assets are at risk and differences in the profit interest of the general and limited partners . some view carried interest as a type of performance - based compensation that should be characterized as ordinary income . that is , the general partner is being compensated for providing the service of generating a positive return on the investment . this argument would seem to have greater merit in cases where a "hurdle rate" must be reached prior to the award of a carried interest . some also argue for a change in the characterization of carried interest based upon the economic principles of efficiency and equity . tax systems are generally deemed more efficient when they tax similar activities in a like manner . 6275 , in making carried interest taxable as ordinary income . the bills stated that carried interest "shall be treated as ordinary income for the performance of services" and thus taxed as ordinary income at rates up to 35% . 3996 was passed by the house of representatives on november 9 , 2007 , and by the senate on december 6 , 2007 , with an amendment that removed the carried interest provision , while h.r .