the president's budget requests no funds for p.l . 480 title i loans , nor any for the bill emerson humanitarian trust , which currently holds 900,000 metric tons of wheat and $107 million in cash . the estimated fy2008 program level of $2.4 billion , all for short - term guarantees , reflects the u.s. response to the world trade organization ruling in the u.s. - brazil cotton dispute . long - term guarantees are suspended , the fee structure is risk - based , and high - risk countries are eliminated . the budget assumes $163 million of ccc funds for the food for progress ( ffp ) program , which provides food aid to emerging democracies . the absence of title i funds would effectively reduce spending on ffp . for the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program , the request is for a constant $100 million appropriation . three agencies are responsible for rural development: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) . the mission area also administers the rural portion of the empowerment zones and enterprise communities initiative , the rural economic partnership zones , and the national rural development partnership . for fy2008 , the administration is requesting a program level of $14.9 billion for direct and guaranteed loans , grants , and loan subsidies . this program level would be supported by a requested appropriation of $2.05 billion ( including salaries and expenses ) . the fy2008 request is approximately $23 million more in budget authority and $985 million more in program level than estimated for fy2007 . the request is about $550 million less in budget authority and $719 million less in program level than for fy2006 . the administration is requesting that the three funding accounts in the rural community advancement program ( rcap ) no longer be combined under rcap . instead , each account would be funded separately with separate appropriations language . for the community facilities account in rhs , the administration requests budget authority of $24.5 million and would terminate a grant program . for water and waste water loan and grants , and the solid waste management programs in rus , the administration requests $503 million . for the business development account in rbs , the request is $43.2 million in budget authority . the administration requests no appropriation for direct loans for the distance learning and telemedicine program ; grants would remain at the fy2007 level of $25 million . for broadband programs , the administration requests $300 million in direct loans ; no funding is requested for grants ( $9 million enacted in fy2007 ) . the administration also requests terminating the "community connect" broadband program . funding for the value - added producer grants program would decrease from fy2007 levels to $15 million ( 25% percent decrease ) , and give priority to special crop projects . the administration also proposes terminating direct loans for the rural multifamily rental housing program and the single family housing program .