below the entity level are cantons and municipalities in the federation and municipalities only in the rs . at the international level , dayton mandated an office of the high representative ( ohr ) to oversee international activities in bosnia and bear authority to impose decisions and remove officials . as the security situation improved , nato gradually reduced its presence in bosnia and turned over peacekeeping duties to the european union ( eu ) in december 2004 . most observers agree that dayton was a great achievement in that it ended the war and laid the foundation for consolidating peace . however , many also believe that the dayton agreement , as a document derived from compromises and reflecting wartime circumstances , cannot by itself insure bosnia's future as a functioning democratic state . in particular , bosnia's multi - layered and ethnically - defined governing structures have presented significant challenges to its efforts to integrate into the european union and nato . political differences among bosnia's leaders and vested interests in the status quo continue to hinder efforts to strengthen bosnia's central governing institutions and administrative capacity . the pull of euro - atlantic integration has fostered a degree of cooperation on this front , but political consensus across ethnic lines on key governing arrangements is still elusive . over the years , the bush administration has assisted bosnia's development as a functioning democratic state , supported its euro - atlantic aspirations , and encouraged bosnia's leaders to consolidate state structures . u.s. and international officials have underscored the regional importance of progress in bosnia , and have decried the divisive nationalist rhetoric that has dominated bosnian politics over the past year or so . they reject initiatives by opposing bosnian politicians that seek to undermine bosnia's territorial integrity , such as calls for the rs to secede or for the entity structure to be eliminated . some members of the 110 th congress retain an interest in bosnia's progress since dayton , its path toward nato membership and eu integration , as well as its record of cooperation on war crimes issues . for fy2009 , the administration has requested over $37 million in bilateral foreign assistance to bosnia , an increase from fy2008 levels ( estimated $33.3 million ) that reflects u.s. concern about bosnia's recent uneven progress in reforms . in recent years , the bush administration and the eu have sought to promote further constitutional reform to improve the governing effectiveness of bosnia's political institutions and overcome some of the dysfunctional aspects of the post - dayton legacy . in march 2005 , the council of europe's venice commission concluded that bosnia's current constitutional arrangements were neither efficient nor rational , and that state - level institutions needed to become far more effective for bosnia to move closer to eu integration . several political and economic reforms have been reached over the years , often with extensive input from and pressure by the international community . for example , the bosnian parties agreed in early 2005 to comprehensive defense and security reforms on merging the formerly rival forces into an integrated army controlled by the central government .