bse has been reported in 11 north american - born cattle . ( a 12 th case was a u.k. import into canada. ) seven more cases have been found on canadian soil , five of them in 2006 , most recently in august 2006 . the annual number of new cases has declined steeply since 1992 . humans who eat contaminated beef are believed susceptible to a rare but fatal brain wasting disease , variant creutzfeldt - jakob disease ( vcjd ) . about 160 people have been diagnosed with vcjd since 1986 , most in the uk and none linked to any canadian or u.s. meat consumption . the first native case was an alberta , canada , beef cow reported in may 2003 . the first u.s. case was in a canadian - born dairy cow found in washington state in december 2003 . the other two u.s. cases were a 12-year - old texas - born and - raised beef cow , found in november 2004 but not confirmed until june 2005 , and a 10-year - old alabama beef cow found in late february 2006 . in epidemiological investigations of the three u.s. cases , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) was unable to track down all related animals of interest , but those that were located tested negative for the disease . despite a beef recall , some meat from the first u.s. bse cow may have been consumed , usda said , adding , however , that the highest - risk tissues never entered the food supply . no materials from the other two u.s. cows entered the food supply , usda also said . in the recent alabama case , authorities were unable to determine the cow's herd of origin . animal health officials initially indicated that all of the north american cases were caused by the consumption of bse - contaminated feed . however , usda reportedly now believes that the two native - born u.s. cattle had "atypical" bse , which differs from other cases . if these cases are determined to be "spontaneous," that may affect future control strategies . usda had asked an expert international review team ( irt ) to assess its response to the first ( december 2003 ) u.s. case , and to comment on the adequacy of existing bse protections . the irt generally concluded ( in february 2003 ) that the investigation had conformed to internationally accepted scientific standards , but urged additional actions , including an intensive surveillance program to measure the magnitude of the bse problem in north america . the irt had concluded that other infected animals probably were imported here , some of their parts rendered into ingredients fed to cattle , and amplified within the cattle herd , indigenously infecting some of them . while agreeing with some of the conclusions , usda also responded that the irt's recommendations were based on the premise of a higher incidence of bse in the united states than was indicated by current studies . usda officials have continued to rely heavily on the findings in a detailed quantitative analysis ( using computer simulation ) conducted for them by the harvard center for risk analysis and tuskegee center for computational epidemiology .