as noted above , the sixth circuit's pontiac decision was not unanimous . from a practical perspective , had the original ruling of the three - judge panel not been invalidated by the split vote of the en banc sixth circuit , the case might have significantly undermined the operation and effect of the title i program , as well as other esea programs that are subject to the "unfunded mandates" provision in ยง 9527 ( a ) . although that prospect did not occur , the fact that the en banc judges were evenly divided on the spending clause question could potentially create a degree of uncertainty across the landscape of federal funding programs by encouraging legal challenges not only to other federal education programs but also to federal funding programs operated by other federal agencies . in addition to the practical ramifications , there are several important legal implications of the pontiac decision . first , the decision is effective only in states that fall within the jurisdiction of the sixth circuit . those states are limited to kentucky , michigan , ohio , and tennessee . because school districts and educational agencies in other states are not affected by the decision , they may decide to file similar lawsuits in other circuits . second , if congress is concerned that the closely divided vote of the en banc sixth circuit could encourage future challenges to nclb requirements , then congress may wish to clarify its views statutorily . for example , congress could choose to amend the nclb act to clarify that states that accept nclb funds are obligated to comply with all of the act's requirements , regardless of whether or not the costs of compliance are fully funded by the federal government . because the school districts do not appear to have appealed to the supreme court , the litigation in the pontiac case has come to an end . the sixth circuit's rulings in the pontiac case have several implications . plaintiffs also sought an injunction prohibiting the secretary from withholding from states and school districts any federal funds to which they are entitled under the nclb because of a failure to comply with the mandates of the nclb that is attributable to a refusal to spend non - nclb funds to achieve such compliance . in 2005 , the united states district court for the eastern district of michigan dismissed the nea's lawsuit . in its ruling , the district court concluded that ยง 9527 ( a ) should be interpreted as a prohibition against the imposition by federal officers and employees of additional , unfunded requirements beyond those provided for in the statute , rather than as an exemption from the statute's requirements when the federal government fails to fully fund the title i program . as a result , the court dismissed the lawsuit for failing to state a claim upon which relief can be granted . the plaintiffs appealed the dismissal to the court of appeals for the sixth circuit , which reversed the district court's decision . however , the case was subsequently reheard , and the en banc sixth circuit divided evenly , meaning that the judgment of the district court to dismiss the case was affirmed .