the senate passed h.r . 3093 , amended with the language of s. 1745 . while conference negotiations on h.r . 3093 broke down for reasons unrelated to gun control , the fy2008 cjs appropriations and the tiahrt language were enacted as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . although the tiahrt language was modified to authorize the release of aggregate firearms trace data on illegal gun trafficking , it still prohibits the use of those data for the purposes of suing gun manufacturers and dealers . without any public debate , similar language was included in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l . exceptions were provided under certain circumstances . the city of new york has pursued a public nuisance civil suit against multiple gun manufacturers based in part on atf trace and investigative data that were acquired under a strict confidentiality order entered by a federal judge before the disclosure limits were enacted . for fy2003-fy2009 , a rider on the atf appropriations language has prohibited that agency from disclosing data on illegal gun trafficking based on firearm traces and ffl transfer records , as well as multiple handgun sale reports , for any purpose other than supporting a "bona fide" criminal investigation . this rider is known as the "tiahrt" amendment , for its sponsor in full committee markup of the fy2004 commerce - justice - state appropriations bill , representative todd tiahrt . proponents of the tiahrt amendment contend that the business records of ffls should be confidential , and that access to these records is only authorized under federal law for the purposes of conducting atf trace requests in order to solve crimes . they argue further that it was never intended that firearm trace data be used to support civil , public nuisance lawsuits against firearms manufacturers and dealers . opponents of the amendment counter that every tool is needed to "crackdown" on irresponsible ffls by analyzing firearm trace data on a regional and national basis , so that federal , state , and local law enforcement authorities can be informed of the source and market areas for "crime guns. a coalition of 210 city mayors led by new york city mayor michael bloomberg favors the repeal of this amendment , but the fraternal order of police reportedly favors retaining it , as does atf . in the 109 th congress , house judiciary committee ordered reported h.r . 5005 , a bill that included a provision ( section 9 ) that would have codified the tiahrt amendment ; however , that bill saw no further action . in addition , senator robert menendez and representative steven r. rothman introduced identical bills ( s. 2460 / h.r . 5033 ) to repeal the fy2006 appropriation rider . senator charles schumer introduced a similar bill ( s. 2629 ) , which he has reintroduced in the 110 th congress ( s. 77 ) . in the 110 th congress , senator richard shelby amended the fy2008 commerce - justice - science ( cjs ) appropriations bill ( s. 1745 ; s.rept . 110-124 ) with a modified rider in full committee markup . a similar rider was included in the house - reported and passed cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .