the state unemployment accounts can borrow from the fua . this investment increases the federal debt . when these securities are redeemed to pay for administration of the program , to lend funds to the states , or to pay for extended benefits , this investment decreases the federal debt . state unemployment taxes are deposited into the unemployment trust fund . many state unemployment accounts required and / or continue to require "loans" to pay for state uc benefits . if states do not increase their suta taxes to repay the loan , federal law requires that the principal of the loan is repaid by reducing federal tax credits for suta taxes and crediting those increased revenues to the fua . the state cannot pay the interest on such loans using the state unemployment account but must pay the interest through state general revenues or other measures . federal law also authorizes appropriations if balances in the federal accounts are insufficient to cover their expenditures . for example , if the states' borrowing needs exceed the available fua balance , congress is authorized to appropriate additional spending authority to cover the amount needed . such appropriations require discretionary action by congress and the president . from fy2009 through fy2015 , the fua had to borrow funds from the treasury in order to loan funds to the state accounts . at the end of the fiscal year , there is a limitation on the balance in the esaa — the account balance cannot exceed 40% of the prior fiscal year's appropriation by congress . administrative costs are funded through distributions from the esaa to the state unemployment accounts . at the end of fy2016 , states were estimated to have collected $40.9 billion while expending $32.3 billion in regular uc benefits . each fiscal year , funds are appropriated through the federal budget process to make distributions from the esaa for the states' costs of administering their unemployment compensation programs , and for the federal costs of administration . the secretary of labor determines ( certifies ) the amount of the administrative payments , and permits the secretary of the treasury to make the payments to the states . the secretary of labor in certifying a state for payment takes into account ( 1 ) that the state's uc programs contain specific provisions related to the payment of monies from the state unemployment system , ( 2 ) the state agency's specific responsibilities in administering the uc program and uc benefits , and ( 3 ) the rights and responsibilities of the uc benefit recipients . net monthly activity is the sum of revenues credited to the esaa less distributions for refunds of futa taxes and additional taxes attributable to a reduced credit for suta taxes . by the end of fy2016 , the federal accounts had collected an estimated $4.8 billion ; the esaa had a net balance of $2.1 billion . since the ceiling for the esaa was $1.7 billion , $0.4 billion in excess funds were transferred to the euca . by the end of fy2016 , the esaa had distributed a total of $4.1 billion to the states for administrative costs .