in addition , the 23 specific exceptions to the gift prohibition listed in the house rules continue to be in force . the exception for reasonable and necessary expenses for some "officially connected" travel is also still provided , and members and staff may continue to accept such travel expenses from many private sources , other than lobbyists , foreign agents , and certain of their clients , but with several additional restrictions , including more detailed disclosure of such travel . all private reimbursement or payment of "officially connected" travel expenses , however , must now receive prior approval from the house committee on standards of official conduct . the house rules now provide a restriction on accepting most gifts from registered lobbyists , agents of foreign principals , and private organizations that employ lobbyists or foreign agents . additionally , unlike previous rules and laws , lobbyists themselves are now expressly prohibited from offering gifts which they know should not be accepted by members or staff under internal house rules , and must certify in required reports to the federal government that no such gifts were offered . there still exists under house rules a general exemption allowing the receipt of most gifts of under $50 from private sources , but this exception now applies only to gifts other than from lobbyists , foreign agents , and their private clients . under the former rules , this exemption had allowed members and staff to receive a gift , such as a meal , a bottle of liquor or wine , or a ticket for entertainment , that did not exceed $49.99 , even if such gift was from a lobbyist . under the new house rules , however , the under - $50 exception for gifts no longer applies if the gift is from a "registered lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal or from a private entity that retains or employs registered lobbyists or agents...." members and staff may thus no longer accept most free meals paid for by lobbyists , foreign agents , or their clients ( under this $50 de minimis exception ) , and may no longer accept tickets to sporting or entertainment events provided by lobbyists , foreign agents , or their clients , unless they pay full face value for the ticket . when members and staff are allowed to accept gifts of tickets and passes to sporting or entertainment events under the $50 exception , or when they reimburse for the full value of the ticket , the "value" of the ticket or pass will now be determined by the actual "face value" printed on the ticket . when there is no face value on the ticket , such as in the case of passes to certain luxury boxes or suites in certain venues , then the value of ticket will now be the highest face - value price of a ticket to the same event .