euc08 and eb interactions . the euc08 program allows states to determine which benefit is paid first . thus , states may choose to pay euc08 before eb or vice versa . states balance the decision of which benefit to pay first by examining the potential cost savings to the state with the potential loss of unemployment benefits for unemployed individuals in the state . it may be less costly for the state to choose to pay for the euc08 benefit first as the euc08 benefit is 100% federally financed ( whereas the eb benefit is 50% state financed ) . however , if the state opts to pay euc08 first , individuals in the state might receive less in total unemployment benefits if the eb program triggers off before the individuals exhaust their euc08 benefits . alaska has opted to pay eb before euc08 benefits . in contrast , rhode island has opted to pay euc08 benefits before eb . uc benefits are financed through employer taxes . the federal taxes on employers are under the authority of the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) , and the state taxes are under the authority given by the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) . these taxes are deposited in the appropriate accounts within the unemployment trust fund ( utf ) . if a state uc program complies with all federal rules , the net futa tax rate for employers is 0.8% on the first $7,000 of each worker's earnings . the 0.8% futa tax funds both federal and state administrative costs as well as the federal share of the eb program , loans to insolvent state uc accounts , and state employment services . federal law defines which jobs a state uc program must cover for the state's employers to avoid paying the maximum futa tax rate ( 6.2% ) on the first $7,000 of each employee's annual pay . federal law requires that a state must cover jobs in firms that pay at least $1,500 in wages during any calendar quarter or employ at least one worker in each of 20 weeks in the current or prior year . the futa tax is not paid by government or nonprofit employers , but state programs must cover government workers and all workers in nonprofits that employ at least four workers in each of 20 weeks in the current or prior year . ( states are reimbursed for expenditures related to federal workers by the federal government. ) an estimated $7.3 billion in futa taxes were collected in fy2007 . after the payments to the state accounts for administrative expenses , the expected net balance in the utf of the employment security administration account , the extended unemployment compensation account ( for the eb program ) , and the federal unemployment account ( for federal loans to the states ) was expected to be $35.2 billion at the end of march 2008 . expiring provision: p.l . on december 19 , 2008 , the president signed p.l . among many other items , p.l . 110-140 includes a one - year extension of 0.2% futa surtax .