since p.l . 106-193 was enacted ? the 113 th congress may also consider market forces in addition to federal involvement in the development of gas hydrates . together with advances in the technology to efficiently produce gas hydrates , the economic viability of gas hydrates will depend on the relative cost of conventional fuels and other sources of natural gas , such as shale gas , as well as other factors such as pipelines and other infrastructure needed to deliver gas hydrate methane to market . additionally , price volatility of natural gas will likely affect the level and continuity of private - sector investment in commercial production of gas hydrates . countries other than the united states lacking large domestic onshore natural gas resources , such as japan or india , may have additional incentive to pursue research and development and commercial production of offshore gas hydrates . gas hydrates occur naturally onshore in some permafrost regions , and at or below the seafloor in sediments where water and gas combine at low temperatures and high pressures to form an ice - like solid substance . methane , the primary component of natural gas , is typically the dominant gas in the hydrate structure . in a gas hydrate , frozen water molecules form a cage - like structure around high concentrations of natural gas . ( see figure 2 . ) the gas hydrate structure is very compact . when heated and depressurized to temperatures and pressures typically found on the earth's surface ( one atmosphere of pressure and 70 o fahrenheit ) , its volume expands by 150 to 170 times . thus , one cubic foot of solid gas hydrate found underground in permafrost or beneath the seafloor would produce between 150 and 170 cubic feet of natural gas when brought to the surface . there are several challenges to commercially exploiting gas hydrates . how much and where gas hydrates occur in commercially viable concentrations are not well known , and how the resource can be extracted safely and economically is a current research focus . reports of vast gas hydrate resources can be misleading unless those estimates are qualified by the use of such terms as in - place resources , technically recoverable resources , and proved reserves . the term in - place is used to describe an estimate of gas hydrate resources without regard for technical or economical recoverability . generally these are the largest estimates . undiscovered technically recoverable resources are producible using current technology , but this does not take into account economic viability . proved reserves are estimated quantities that can be recovered using current technology under existing economic and operating conditions . for example , the u.s. department of energy's energy information agency ( eia ) estimates that in 2009 the total undiscovered technically recoverable dry natural gas resources in the united states were approximately 2,200 tcf , but proved reserves were only 273 tcf . this is an important distinction because there are no proved reserves for gas hydrates at this time . gas hydrates have no confirmed past or current commercial production . for perspective , the united states consumed over 25 tcf of natural gas in 2012 .