this is the option that epa took . based on the supreme court ruling in massachusetts v. epa , epa has engaged in efforts to control ghg emissions under a range of caa programs , beginning with a section 202 "endangerment" finding in 2009 . while some amici curiae supporting the challenges to the clean power plan in that litigation object to the "endangerment findings" that epa has issued since massachusetts , the petitioners and intervenors challenging the clean power plan do not dispute or , for the most part , reference the decision . epa , in defense of the clean power plan , cites massachusetts repeatedly in its brief , as do several of the intervenors and amici curiae supporting epa . circuit seeking review of the denial . the court's decision left epa with three options for responding to the petition: ( 1 ) find that new motor vehicle ghg emissions may "endanger public health or welfare," the prerequisite to limiting them under section 202 , then issue emission standards ; ( 2 ) find that they do not satisfy that prerequisite , or ( 3 ) decide that climate change science is so uncertain as to preclude making either finding ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) . given the state of climate change science by 2007 , it was widely believed at the time that option ( 1 ) was the only legally defensible one for epa . since this finding , the agency has regulated ghg emissions from new motor vehicles . under other sections of the caa , epa has regulated ghg emissions from various stationary sources . most recently , the agency issued its clean power plan rule to regulate ghg emissions from existing fossil fuel fired power plants , but this rule was stayed by the supreme court while the rule is challenged in litigation . as indicated earlier , these post - massachusetts agency actions are described in other crs reports ; here , only a few select points are made in relation to the continuing impact of the massachusetts v. epa decision . the massachusetts ruling remains in full effect . its holding that the caa authorizes epa to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles is the governing law , barring supreme court reversal or congressional amendment . so far , the finding of standing in massachusetts generally has not proved helpful to non - state plaintiffs seeking to establish standing in other climate change litigation . climate change cases since massachusetts involving non - state plaintiffs and non - caa causes of action ( such as common law nuisance ) have largely rejected extending its lenient standard for standing . the holding of massachusetts was used by a 2011 supreme court decision to bar federal common law claims ( such as nuisance ) against entities on the basis of their contribution to climate change . massachusetts strengthened the argument that congress in the caa intended to leave no room for courts to develop overlapping federal common law restricting ghg emissions , since it made clear that a congressional enactment , the caa , was available for that same purpose .