more than 100 crops are insurable . the 2014 farm bill increases funding for crop insurance relative to baseline levels , most of which is for two new insurance products , one for cotton and one for other crops . a new crop insurance policy called stacked income protection plan ( stax ) is made available for cotton producers , since cotton is not covered by the new counter - cyclical price or revenue programs in title i . for other crops , the 2014 farm bill makes available an additional policy called supplemental coverage option ( sco ) , based on expected county yields or revenue , to cover part of the deductible under the producer's underlying policy ( referred to as a farmer's out - of - pocket loss or "shallow loss" ) . additional crop insurance changes in the 2014 farm bill are designed to expand or improve crop insurance for other commodities , including specialty crops . new provisions revise the value of crop insurance for organic crops to reflect the higher prices of organic crops rather than conventional crops . finally , usda is required to conduct more research on whole farm revenue insurance with higher coverage levels than currently available . they are subject to annual appropriations . while both types of programs are important , mandatory programs often dominate the farm bill debate and are the focus of the farm bill's budget . following are summaries of the major provisions of each title of the 2014 farm bill . for more detailed information see crs report r43076 , the 2014 farm bill ( p.l . 113-79 ) : summary and side - by - side , which compares the provisions in the final 2014 farm bill to previous law and the house - and senate - passed versions of the farm bill . under the enacted 2014 farm bill , farm support for traditional commodity crops — grains , oilseeds , and cotton — is restructured by eliminating what were formerly known as direct payments , the counter - cyclical program , and the average crop revenue election program . under the 2014 farm bill , producers may choose between two programs that respond to declines in either price or revenue: ( 1 ) price loss coverage ( plc ) , which is a counter - cyclical price program that makes a farm payment when the farm price of a covered crop declines below its statutory "reference price" ; and ( 2 ) agriculture risk coverage ( arc ) , which is a revenue - based program designed to cover a portion of a farmer's out - of - pocket loss ( referred to as "shallow loss" ) when crop revenue declines . these farm programs are separate from a producer's decision to purchase crop insurance ( title xi ) . the 2014 farm bill makes significant changes to u.s. dairy policy by eliminating the dairy product price support program , the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program , and export subsidies . these are replaced by a new program that makes payments to participating dairy producers when the national margin ( average farm price of milk minus an average feed cost calculation ) falls below a producer - selected margin .