this is between the eu and turkey. the united states believes that turkey's membership in nato has demonstrated that turkey can interact constructively with an organization dominated by most of the same european countries that belong to the eu and play a positive role in foreign policy matters that impact europe , whether it is the europe of the eu or the europe of nato . however , the united states has been disappointed that it has not been able to use its influence to help shape a more constructive eu - turkey relationship in an attempt to promote closer nato - eu relations . progress throughout 2008 continued to be negligible . however , despite ongoing internal political issues which polarized the political atmosphere in turkey and the global economic crisis which began to consume the government's attention , six additional chapters of the acquis were formally opened by the eu . however , key chapters relating to energy , external relations , and security and defense matters had been held up by several eu member states , including france , although in the case of energy , france did propose to open this chapter during its 2008 presidency of the eu council . in early 2009 , turkey in a sign of a renewed commitment to the accession process , announced the appointment of its first full - time eu accession negotiator , state minister egemen bağış , a decision noted as a positive step by the eu council . however , in march 2009 turkey's accession process hit a political bump in the european parliament . in a resolution on turkey adopted by the parliament , the members of parliament noted with concern the "continuous slowdown of the reform process" and called on turkey "to prove its political will to continue the reform process. the resolution also stressed the need to reach a solution to the cyprus question and called for turkey to remove its military forces from the island . despite the concerns expressed by the parliament , in june 2009 the 11 th chapter of the acquis was opened , suggesting that turkey was making some progress meeting the reform criteria . as in all of their previous reports on the accession progress , the commission , council , and parliament found positive issues that they could point to and noted in one year or another that they welcomed turkey's continued commitment to the negotiation process , as well as advancements turkey had made in judicial reform , civil - military relations , and cultural rights , relations with both the kurds and armenia , and its positive role in the nabucco pipeline that the eu has sought to provide an alternative source for delivering natural gas to europe . nevertheless , each assessment noted turkey's shortcomings in the areas of freedom of expression and freedom of the press , respect for property rights , and in other areas . all three institutions continued to "note with deep regret that turkey , despite repeated calls , continues refusing to fulfill its obligations regarding the additional protocol and normalization of its relations with the republic of cyprus.