the final regulations for p.l . 108-446 were issued on august 14 , 2006 . generally , the department of education ( ed ) declined to elaborate on the statutory language , observing that "further guidance on the interpretation of this statutory language is not appropriate since judicial interpretations of statutory provisions will necessarily vary based upon case - by - case factual determinations , consistent with the requirement that the award of reasonable attorneys fees is left to a court's discretion. one of the issues ed declined to address in the regulations involved whether a court could award fees to non - attorney advocates who accompanied and advised the parents at a due process hearing . ed stated that "[l]ay advocates are , by definition , not attorneys and are not entitled to compensation as if they were attorneys. these provisions were amended in 1997 . such explicit language was not added in the 2004 reauthorization of idea . the supreme court's rationale was found by ed to be controlling concerning the fees of non - attorney experts , and the department of education declined to add a regulatory provision on the subject . 105-17 amendments allowed the reduction of attorneys' fees if the attorney representing the parents did not provide the lea with timely and specific information about the child and the basis of the dispute , and specifically excluded the payment of attorneys' fees for most individualized education plan ( iep ) meetings . the house and senate bills leading to the 2004 law contained very different approaches to the attorneys' fees issue . the house bill , h.r . 1350 , 108 th cong. , would have changed the determination of the amount of attorneys' fees by requiring the governor , or other appropriate state official , to determine rates . the senate bill , s. 1248 , 108 th cong. , kept the same general framework as in previous law with several changes . the final 2004 idea reauthorization was closer to the senate version and kept many of the previous provisions on attorneys' fees but also made several additions . these include allowing attorneys' fees for the state educational agency ( sea ) or the local educational agency ( lea ) against the parent or the parent's attorney in certain situations . under the new law the general provisions regarding filing a complaint and appeals have not changed except that the local educational agency may also file a complaint . a parent or lea may file a complaint with respect to the identification , evaluation , educational placement , provision of a free appropriate public education or placement in an alternative educational setting . the parents or lea then have an opportunity for an impartial due process hearing with a right to appeal . at the court's discretion , reasonable attorneys' fees may be awarded as part of the costs to the parents of a child with a disability who is the prevailing party . the 2004 reauthorization also allows the award of reasonable attorneys' fees against a parent's attorney to a prevailing sea or lea in two situations .