this interim formula took effect in 2001 . hud contracted with the harvard graduate school of design to conduct the public housing operating cost study ; its results were published in 2003 . capital costs are the costs of major renovations or modernizations . hud published a proposed rule in the spring of 2005 , but the rule was criticized for differing significantly from the agreements made during negotiated rulemaking . hud published a final rule in the fall of 2005 that more closely resembled the initial agreement of the negotiated rulemaking committee . operating costs are the day - to - day costs of running a building , such as utility , administrative , and routine maintenance costs . operating costs vary based on many factors , including the age of a building , its heating and cooling systems , and its location . in the early years of the public housing program , phas were expected to meet their operating costs through the rents they collected . over time , tenant rents were no longer sufficient to cover public housing operating expenses , in part because tenants became poorer and therefore unable to pay as much in rent , and in part because the costs of maintaining the buildings increased as they aged . in the late 1960s , congress began providing operating subsidies to phas to supplement the low rents paid by tenants . the system in place for providing those subsidies until 2001 was the performance funding system ( pfs ) . in a 1998 public housing reform law , congress responded to criticisms that the pfs formula was outdated by creating a new public housing operating fund . the law required the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) to use negotiated rulemaking to develop a new formula for distributing the funds . a negotiated rulemaking committee convened in 1999 involved phas and other stakeholder groups . during deliberation , it was agreed that sufficient data were not available to determine the true costs of operating public housing and that a study should be undertaken . until the results of the study were available , the committee agreed to use a modified version of the pfs to create an interim operating fund formula . another negotiated rulemaking committee was established to use the results of the study to develop a final formula to replace the interim formula . the new formula took effect in january 2007 . phas , which are funded on a calendar year basis , began receiving funding under the new formula in cy2007 . the operating fund provides subsidies to phas to make up the difference between what it costs to run public housing and what low - income tenants pay in rent . under the interim formula , the calculation for determining a pha's operating subsidy eligibility used two components: formula expenses ( meant to represent the cost of running public housing ) and formula income ( meant to represent the amount collected in tenant rents ) . hud subtracts a pha's formula income from its formula expenses and the amount by which the income is short of the expenses is the pha's operating subsidy eligibility .