that was fundamental to it . now , to your point: the investments that were made — understanding the technology investments that were ongoing — certainly , we'll take advantage of that going forward . thank you , mr. chairman . taylor: chair thanks the gentleman . trautman ( ? : congressman courtney , let me start and i'll turn it over to anyone else . you're correct . secretary gates did announce — recommend cancellation . and his basis to that was the original $6 billion program which was headed towards $13 billion , six years overdue ; does not meet the requirements of the white house . and ( inaudible ) in fact was the long way to meet that requirement . so this has been an extremely challenging requirement in this program , complicated and exacerbated by us trying to bring this program to meet a need earlier , when we hadn't really defined what we needed to do . there were mistakes that were made . we drove significant developmental efforts forward at time when we weren't certain what those impacts would be . and we grossly underestimated the cost and schedule required to deliver this . as a result of that , undersecretary defense carter directed the cancellation of the program to mr. stackley ( ph ) . we are taking those initiatives now to cancel that program , and bring it to a resolution . the path forward is within 30 days , we will come forward with a high level plan of what we will — how will we anticipate going forward in the future . that's not all the details that go with every facet of the program to understand , but it is a high level , if you will , plan of action , how we're going to go forward to meet the direction ; also to have a program developed so we can do the presidential replacement helicopter program . but what do you sort of see as the next steps in the way forward ? obviously , we need a new helicopter . so in this case , i believe , what we need to do now is we need to meet the requirements . we need to understand what those requirements are going to be . understand the impacts of those requirements . begin with requirements , take them through to the impacts of that , and do the due rigor we needed to do — we need to do an executable program , sir . and i'll turn it over for other comments . architzel: well , then let add then , sir . two things come to my mind . first is: are the legacy vh - 3s and vh - 60s preserved and remain safe for carrying our president ? and the answer to that is "yes. and this budget includes requested dollars to make that a reality . the second is: these airplanes are going to need to be replaced . the vh - 3 is 40 years old by 2017 even with the service life extension programs that we are assessing now . they are near the end of their life . i am very anxious to get back into the requirements generation process .