although h.r . 2749 and s. 510 would impose similar requirements , they would achieve them in different ways . selected changes proposed by both bills include registration of all facilities ; new requirements for record - keeping and for tracing products ; mandatory fda recall authority ; authority for the agency to require imports to be certified as to their safety ; and a requirement that all facilities have food safety plans that include hazard analyses and risk - based preventive controls . the senate help committee also adopted an amendment that would require fda to update guidelines in fish and fisheries products hazards and controls guidance within 180 days . three seafood - related provisions have been added to the senate bill that focus on ( 1 ) establishing interagency agreements to improve seafood safety ( ยง 201 ) ; ( 2 ) assessing changes to regulations for post - harvest processing of raw oysters ( ยง 114 ) ; and ( 3 ) sending inspectors to assess production of seafood imported into the united states ( ยง 306 ) . the scope of interagency agreements identified in ยง 201 includes examining and testing seafood ; coordinating inspections ; standardizing data ; modifying existing processes ; sharing enforcement and compliance information ; and conducting joint training and outreach . section 114 would require the secretary of hhs to submit a report to congress before issuing guidance , regulation , or suggested amendments related to post - harvest processing of oysters . it would also require gao to review the secretary's report and report its findings to congress . these reports would be waived if a consensus agreement is reached among federal and state regulators and the oyster industry , acting through the interstate shellfish sanitation conference . section 306 would permit the secretary of commerce , in coordination with the secretary of hhs , to send inspector ( s ) to a country or facility of an exporter of seafood imported into the united states to assess practices and processes used in farming , cultivation , harvesting , preparation for market , and transportation of seafood . 601 et seq . ) and the poultry products inspection act ( ppia ; 21 u.s.c . 451 et seq .

 ) , to inspect all livestock and poultry both before and after they are slaughtered , and to be present whenever plants are processing meat and poultry products . jurisdictional differences were among the reasons previous bills were not enacted . usda and the house and senate agriculture committees have long been responsible for meat and poultry inspection , while fda , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) , and the house committee on energy and commerce have asserted jurisdiction over the safety of seafood ( and other foods ) . others such as the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , also have had roles . seafood safety began to garner new attention in the 110 th congress , following a number of reports of contaminated foods , some from foreign sources , entering the food supply .