we're involved in training . we are involved in military reform in georgia . so this is an ongoing relationship and it is a relationship that we are pursuing , both bilaterally and within the framework of our nato allies . he appeared to endorse exploring improved nato ties with russia , but urged a cautious approach , averring that the obama administration "has not yet looked comprehensively at its policies with respect to russia , and so i think our position on that [on resuming nato - russia council meetings] , on [when] that ought to happen , is not yet settled. at the nato foreign ministers' meeting in early march 2009 , secretary of state clinton stressed that the renewal of dialogue in the nato - russia council did not spell any less commitment by nato for eventual alliance membership for georgian and ukraine . in associated meetings of the nato - georgia and nato - ukraine commissions , she "reiterated ... the united states' firm commitment to each of those nations moving toward nato membership and our equally strong commitment to work with them along with nato to make clear that they should not be the subject of russian intimidation or aggression . but i think ... there are benefits to reenergizing the nato - russia council... . i don't think you punish russia by stopping conversations with them about ... the failure to comply with the requirements set forth by the osce and others concerning their actions in georgia. ongoing u.s. support for georgia's sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity was reflected in the u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership , signed in january 2009 , which states that "our two countries share a vital interest in a strong , independent , sovereign , unified , and democratic georgia. the accord is similar to a u.s. - ukraine charter signed in december 2008 and a u.s. - baltic charter signed in 1998 with estonia , latvia , and lithuania . in the latter case , the charter was viewed as a means to help advance the states toward nato membership . in the security realm , the u.s. - georgia charter states that "the united states and georgia intend to expand the scope of their ongoing defense and security cooperation programs to defeat [threats to global peace and stability] and to promote peace and stability. such cooperation also aims "to strengthen georgia's candidacy for nato membership. the two sides will work within the nato - georgia commission "to increase interoperability and coordination of capabilities between nato and georgia , including via enhanced training and equipment for georgian forces. before the signing , georgian foreign minister grigol vashadze hailed the accord as a "stepping stone which will bring georgia to euro - atlantic structures , to membership within nato , and to [the] family of western and civilized nations. deputy assistant secretary bryza stressed that the charter does not provide security guarantees to georgia . he also stated that u.s. - georgian defense cooperation programs were still being developed .