protecting populations at risk. drl directly funds u.s. - based and international nongovernmental organizations and universities . through the bureau's programs , u.s. and international nongovernmental entities engage chinese ngos ; government - sponsored social organizations and institutions , such as women's groups and universities ; reform - oriented government bodies ; and legal and judicial institutions and individuals . due to political sensitivities in china , drl does not openly disclose the names of its grant recipients . major drl program areas in china have included the following: rule of law: strengthen legal and judicial institutions and promote their independence ; train legal and judicial professionals ; increase public access to the justice system ; promote criminal and civil law reform . civil society: develop the capacity of nongovernmental organizations , foundations , and charitable groups in fund - raising and ngo management . citizen participation: promote public dialogue and input regarding the formation of policy . labor: advance labor law , rights , and advocacy ; develop collective bargaining mechanisms ; strengthen migrant worker rights . good governance: support government transparency and accountability . civil liberties: promote freedom of expression , the press , and information ; advance mass media development ; support freedom of religion . since 2000 , congress has made available economic support funds ( esf ) for sustainable development , environmental conservation , and cultural preservation in the tibet autonomous region ( tar ) and tibetan communities in china . nearly half of china's ethnic tibetans live in the tar . other tibetan areas include parts of the prc provinces of gansu , qinghai , sichuan , and yunnan . u.s. programs also aim to expand citizen involvement in local economic enterprises , development planning , and social services and increase the capacity of tibetans to compete in the formal economy . the department of state also administers health , education , refugee , and scholarship programs for tibetan exile communities in india and nepal . u.s. - funded programs have continued despite an increasingly restrictive political environment for ngos in tibetan areas . between 2002 and 2015 , approximately $70 million in u.s. assistance was appropriated for these purposes , including an estimated $7.9 million in fy2015 . in most years , the congressional appropriation for tibetan programs exceeded the state department's budget request . in addition , the national endowment for democracy has supported programs in tibetan areas through its annual congressional appropriation . as funding for u.s. assistance activities in china overall has declined in recent years , assistance for tibetan programs as a proportion of total u.s. foreign assistance to china has increased . foreign operations appropriations legislation stipulates that assistance for tibetan communities be allocated only to nongovernmental organizations and support projects funded by international financial institutions as long as they do not promote the migration and settlement of or transfer of land ownership to non - tibetans . usaid activities in tibetan areas of china aim to strengthen the capacity of tibetan communities , local organizations , and artisans to develop sustainable livelihoods . assistance efforts aim to support agricultural and other income - generating activities ; help strengthen small enterprises , business associations , and herder cooperatives ; and improve access to markets .