congress has not enacted these exemptions to date . dod requested them in the administration's defense authorization proposals from fy2003 through fy2008 . the administration's fy2009 defense authorization bill ( h.r . 5658 and s. 2787 , introduced by request ) does not include these exemptions . apart from defense authorization legislation , at least one stand - alone bill has been introduced in the 110 th congress to clarify the degree to which military activities must comply with environmental requirements . the following sections discuss past administration proposals and related issues . dod had proposed to amend the definition of "solid waste" in the solid waste disposal act and "release" ( or threatened release ) in cercla , to exclude military munitions on an operational range . opponents asserted that this exemption would have placed military munitions on such ranges beyond the reach of these two statutes , allowing munitions and resulting contamination to remain and present potential health risks . as the exemption would no longer have applied once a range ceased to be operational , it presumably would not have extended to ranges on closed bases after the land is transferred out of military jurisdiction . dod asserted its proposal would have clarified existing regulations that the environmental protection agency finalized in 1997 with authorities under the solid waste disposal act . for regulatory purposes , "used or fired" munitions on a range are considered solid waste only when they are removed from their landing spot . until dod removes them and they "become" solid waste , they are not subject to disposal or cleanup requirements under the solid waste disposal act . dod stated that this clarification was needed in statute to eliminate the possibility of legal challenges that could require cleanup of a range each time a munition is deposited , which could make training impractical . some members of congress , states , and environmental organizations expressed concern that the proposed amendments could have had broader implications . first , amending the definition of release would exceed the scope of the above regulations and place military ranges beyond cercla's reach . second , such an exemption could result in removing state authority under both statutes to monitor military ranges to determine whether contamination may migrate off - site and present a health risk to nearby populations . further , the proposed language could have circumvented the authority under both statutes to file citizen suits to compel cleanup of military ranges . dod also had proposed to exempt military readiness activities from air quality "conformity" requirements for three years . however , the effect of certain provisions is unclear . the 108 th congress enacted a broad exemption from the marine mammal protection act for national defense , and a narrower exemption from designation of military lands as critical habitat under the endangered species act if certain conditions are satisfied . although one provision would appear to prohibit exemptions from environmental requirements , another provision acknowledges the possibility of future exemptions and would limit their duration to six months , unless extended by an act of congress .