5122 , as well as h.r . 3333 , would have authorized , under certain parameters , the use of military forces or the national guard along the border . the military does not appear to have a direct legislative mandate to protect or patrol the border or to engage in immigration enforcement . indeed , direct military involvement in law enforcement activities without proper statutory authorization might run afoul of the posse comitatus act . the military does have , however , general legislative authority that allows it to provide support to federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ( lea ) in counterdrug and counterterrorism efforts , which might indirectly provide border security and immigration control assistance . military personnel for these operations are drawn from the active and reserve forces of the military and from the national guard . under "title 10 duty status," national guard personnel operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the pca . typically , however , the national guard operates under the control of state and territorial governors . in "state active duty" national guard personnel operate under the control of their governor , are paid according to state law , can perform activities authorized by state law , and are not subject to the restrictions of the pca . because border security is primarily a federal concern , some states have looked to the federal government for funding to support some of their national guard activities . under title 32 of the u.s. code , national guard personnel generally serve a federal purpose and receive federal pay and benefits , but command and control remains with the governor . a "homeland defense activity" is statutorily defined as "an activity undertaken for the military protection of the territory or domestic population of the united states ... from a threat or aggression against the united states. although a deployment of national guard troops for border security purposes could arguably be an activity "undertaken for the military protection" of a "domestic population," it is unclear whether the porous nature of the border or illegal entry of aliens is the type of "threat" or "aggression" that would be "necessary and appropriate" for national guard troops . the state of arizona requested federal funds for its national guard under chapter 9 for the performance of homeland defense - border security activities . this type of service is commonly referred to as "title 32 duty status," and examples are discussed below . according to the administration , the deployment of the 6,000 guardsmen derives its authority from 32 u.s.c . â§502 ( a ) , which allows the secretary of the army and air force to prescribe regulations for national guard drill and training and â§502 ( f ) , described below . federal funding may be provided to a state for the implementation of a drug interdiction program in accordance with 32 u.s.c . under this section , the secretary of defense may grant funding to the governor of a state who submits a "drug interdiction and counterdrug activities plan" that satisfies certain statutory requirements .