the vice president is elected each year and cannot be re - elected . the management committee consists of the president , the vice president , committee chairs , and 12 representatives of member organizations . the standing committees represent three areas of specialization within the credit industry: short - term credit insurance represented by the short term ( st ) committee , medium - and long - term credit insurance and lending represented by the medium long term ( mlt ) committee , and investment insurance represented by the investment ( inv ) committee . six of the members for the management committee represent the two largest organizations in each of the three committees . the remaining six members are elected on a rotating basis for a two - year term . to support the berne union leadership , the berne union has a staff of five people , known as the secretariat , located in london . these five staff members are responsible for coordinating all berne union and prague club activities and for providing ways for the members to participate . in particular , the secretariat is responsible for maintaining external relations and for promoting the berne union and its members within the export credit and insurance industry as a whole by supporting opportunities for members to meet and discuss professional matters and to exchange views and experiences . this interchange of information is achieved through three methods , annual general meetings and committee meetings , annual seminars and workshops , and an intranet among the berne union members . annual general meetings are hosted by a berne union member on a rotating basis and take place over four or five days . discussions at these meetings reflect broad aspects of international trade , international finance , and developments in specific industry sectors . in particular , member discussions focus on developing and promoting the best available practices in the fields of international trade finance and foreign investment insurance . recently , the members focused their attention on such issues as the impact of the global credit crunch and the effect it is having on global trade ; the dynamic expansion of the indian economy and the growing demand for credit insurance ; and trends in social and corporate responsibility , green initiatives in project finance , and the expanding capacity for local currency finance . the berne union has developed long - standing relationships with the leading international and regional financial institutions in the credit and investment insurance industry . for instance , the union has developed strong ties with such groups as the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the international monetary fund ( imf ) , and the world bank group , and has worked closely with these organizations to promote international financial stability and broad - based economic growth . the berne union is also in regular contact with such regional development banks as the european bank of reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) and the asian development bank , as agencies from both regions are active members of the prague club .