congress has several options . it could repeal the restrictions before the country ( ies ) actually enter ( s ) the wto , completely separating the issues of title iv repeal and wto accession . this is the course that congress has followed in most cases to date and would allow the united states to fulfill the unconditional mfn requirement prior to the country acceding to the wto . many of the countries in question , view the jackson - vanik requirements and the rest of the title iv restrictions as cold war relics that have no applicability to their current emigration policies and , more generally , to the types of governments they now have . all of these provisions have time limits . the legislation authorizing pntr for china also provided for the establishment of a congressional - executive commission to monitor human rights protection in china to replace congress's focus on this issue that occurred during the annual ntr renewal debate . countries that are still subject to the restrictions have also applied for membership to the wto and are at various stages of the accession process: azerbaijan , belarus , kazakhstan , tajikistan , and uzbekistan . congress usually has no legislative role in the accession of countries to the wto . however , the legislative requirement for repeal of title iv provides a role , albeit indirectly , in the cases of the above - mentioned affected countries by giving congress leverage on the negotiation of conditions for wto accession . they assert that their countries should be treated as normal trade partners and , therefore , that the restrictions should be removed unconditionally . a second option would be for congress to link the granting of pntr with the country's accession to the wto . for example , congress could follow the model established with pntr for china by requiring the president to certify that the conditions under which the country is entering the wto are at least equivalent to the conditions that the united states agreed to under its bilateral accession agreement with the country . it can be argued that in this way , congress helped define , at least indirectly , the conditions under which china entered the wto . czechoslovakia was an original signatory to the gatt in 1947 . in 1951 , the united states suspended mfn treatment because it had become communist . because czechoslovakia was an original signatory to the gatt and not a newly acceding member , the non - application provision did not apply . instead , the united states sought and obtained from the other gatt signatories approval for the suspension of mfn treatment . the united states invoked the non - application provision when romania and hungary became gatt signatories in 1971 and 1973 , respectively . these restrictions no longer applied after the united states , through legislation , extended unconditional mfn , or permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) , status to czechoslovakia ( later the czech republic and slovakia ) , hungary , and romania after the fall of the communist governments in those countries .