( 26 stat . although these standards were never enforced if the states failed to meet them , this language was repeated in the 1911 apportionment act and remained in effect until 1929 , with the adoption of the permanent apportionment act , which did not include any districting standards . after 1929 , there were no congressionally imposed standards governing congressional redistricting ; in 1941 , however , congress enacted a law providing for various contingencies if states failed to redistrict after a census — including at - large representation . ( 55 stat 761. ) in 1967 , congress reimposed the requirement that representatives must run from single - member districts , rather than running at - large . ( 81 stat . both the 1941 and 1967 laws are still in effect , codified at 2 u.s.c . in branch v. smith , the supreme court considered the operation and inherent tension between these two provisions . the question of congressional authority was not in dispute in this litigation . rather , the court noted in passing that the current statutory scheme governing apportionment of the house of representatives was enacted in 1929 pursuant to congressional authority under the "times , places and manner" provision of the constitution . consequently , it seems likely that congress has broad authority , within specified constitutional parameters , to establish how members' districts will be established , including the creation of at - large districts . it might be suggested that creating an at - large congressional district in a state could violate the "one person , one vote" standard established by the supreme court in wesberry v. sanders . in wesberry , the supreme court first applied the one person , one vote standard in the context of evaluating the constitutionality of a georgia congressional redistricting statute that created a district with two to three times as many residents as the state's other nine districts . in striking down the statute , the court held that article i , section 2 , clause 1 , providing that representatives be chosen "by the people of the several states" and be "apportioned among the several states ... according to their respective numbers," requires that "as nearly as is practicable , one man's vote in a congressional election is to be worth as much as another's. while it is not beyond dispute , it does not appear that the creation of an at - large district under the circumstances outlined in h.r . 157 would be interpreted to create a conflict with the "one person , one vote" standard . no further action was taken by the house . on february 26 , 2009 , the senate passed a related bill , s. 160 , by a vote of 61-37 . during the 110 th congress , the house passed similar legislation , h.r . 1905 , by a vote of 241 to 177 . a similar bill , s. 1257 , was considered by the senate , but a motion to invoke cloture failed by a vote of 57 to 42 . this report discusses the constitutionality of the aspect of this legislation that would create an at - large congressional district .