should animal id be mandated ? what data should be collected and who should hold it , government or private entities ? to what extent should producer records be shielded from the public and government agencies ? should traceability be expanded to follow meat and poultry products from farm to consumer , and / or used for other purposes such as food safety or certification of labeling claims ? how much will it cost , and who should pay ? other bills intended to address many of these questions could emerge , possibly as farm bill items . also see: crs report rl32199 , bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad cow disease" ) : current and proposed safeguards crs report rl32012 , animal identification and meat traceabilit . another possible , and somewhat related , item is country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) , which the 2002 farm bill required of many retailers of fresh produce , red meats , seafood , and peanuts . although the seafood labeling rules are in place , congress has delayed implementation for red meats , produce , and peanuts until september 30 , 2008 , while lawmakers continue to debate the need for , and anticipated costs and benefits of , cool . in the 110 th congress , bills ( h.r . 357 ; s. 404 ) have been introduced that would require implementation by september 30 , 2007 . see also: crs report rs22955 , country - of - origin labeling for food . the united states is one of the leading exporters of livestock and poultry products , which have been among its fastest - growing categories of agricultural exports . however , u.s. market share is being challenged , and for some products surpassed , by highly competitive foreign exporters such as brazil , australia , india , argentina , and new zealand in beef / veal , canada and brazil in pork , and brazil in poultry . u.s. exporters also face foreign trade barriers such as high import tariffs and divergent foreign food safety and animal health measures ( sometimes regarded as baseless by the exporters ) . examples of recent problems include russia's restrictions on u.s. beef and pork exports , purportedly over animal disease concerns , japan's and korea's slowness in ramping up u.s. beef imports due to a limited number of cases here of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or mad cow disease ) , and a longstanding european union ban on importation of meat from animals treated with growth hormones approved for use here . trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which permits the president to negotiate trade deals and present them to congress for an up or down vote without amendment , expires on june 30 , 2007 , making renewal a topic in the 110 th congress . the administration has used tpa to pursue an ambitious series of bilateral and regional free trade agreements ( ftas ) as well as to participate in negotiations for new multilateral trade rules under the world trade organization ( wto ) . u.s. interests seek assurances that any new agreements will not favor foreign over u.s. animal products .