this article , too , has sparked some controversy . stephen moore , a consultant for gorton moore international , objected to the methods used by the researchers , commenting in the wall street journal that the lancet article lacked some of the hallmarks of good research: a small margin of error , a record of the demographics of respondents ( so that one can be sure one has captured a fair representation of an entire population ) , and a large number of cluster points . on the other hand , documents written by the uk ministry of defence's chief scientific advisor have come to light , which called the survey's methods "close to best practice" and "robust. three cluster studies of violence - related mortality in iraq have recently been undertaken . unami continues to maintain that making such data public is in the public interest. unami did not publish another human rights report until december 2 , 2008 , when it issued a report covering the human rights situation in iraq from january 1 , 2008 – june 30 , 2008 . this latest report provides a list of instances of bombings in which civilians were killed , but does not give a comprehensive estimate of civilian deaths . the report's first recommendation to the government of iraq is to "issue on a regular basis mortality data compiled by the ministry of health , based on information received from all governorates and statistics kept at the medico - legal institute in baghdad , together with details of the methodology used to calculate the figures. in a november 2008 statement in front of the united nations security council , ambassador zalmay khalilzad announced that the security situation in iraq had "significantly improved since june 2007. . according to the ambassador , the number of overall attacks since june 2007 had decreased by 86% and iraqi civilian deaths due to violence had decreased by 84% in the same time period . the non - profit iraq body count also reported a decrease in civilian deaths in 2008 ; according to their database , 8,315-9,028 , or approximately 25 people a day , iraqi civilians died due to violence in 2008 . by comparison , 22,671-24,295 ( or approximately 67 a day ) civilian deaths were added to their database in 2007 , and 25,774-27,599 civilian deaths ( or approximately 76 a day ) were added in 2006 . however , the reported decrease has not been entirely consistent on a month - to - month basis . the new york times reports that the iraqi health ministry counted a total of 148 civilian deaths for november 2008 , compared with 118 deaths in october and 156 in september . table 1 , below , provides iraqi civilian dead and wounded estimates from non - governmental sources . these estimates are based on varying time periods and have been created using differing methodologies , and therefore readers should exercise caution when using these statistics . the first two studies were both conducted by researchers from johns hopkins university and baghdad's al - mustansiriya university and are commonly referred to in the press as "the lancet studies" because they were published in the british medical journal of that name .