key points are summarized below . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l . 103-66 ) amended the communications act of 1934 with a number of important provisions affecting the availability of spectrum licenses . the licensing improvement section of the act laid out the general requirements for the fcc to establish a competitive bidding methodology and consider , in the process , objectives such as the development and rapid deployment of new technologies . the law prohibited the fcc from making spectrum allocations decisions based "solely or predominately on the expectation of federal revenues...." the emerging telecommunications technologies section directed the ntia to identify not less than 200 mhz of auctionable radio frequencies used by the federal government that could be transferred to the commercial sector . the fcc was directed to allocate and assign these released frequencies over a period of at least 10 years , and to reserve a significant portion of the frequencies for allocation after the ten - year time span . similar to the requirements for competitive bidding , the fcc was instructed to ensure the availability of frequencies for new technologies and services , and also the availability of frequencies to stimulate the development of wireless technologies . the fcc was further required to address "the feasibility of reallocating portions of the spectrum from current commercial and other non - federal uses to provide for more efficient use of spectrum" and for "innovation and marketplace developments that may affect the relative efficiencies of different spectrum allocations. the advanced wireless services ( aws - 1 ) auction that was concluded in september 2006 is one result of spectrum reassignment as required in this section . subsequent modifications of the communications act have not substantively changed the above - noted provisions regarding spectrum allocation . it appears that , in 1993 , congress foresaw that inclusive policies for access to airwaves would have to take into account developments in technology and cultural changes that were , at the time , glimpsed but not fully imagined . the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-171 , title iii ) requires broadcasters to end analog broadcasting by february 17 , 2009 , freeing the spectrum—usually referred to as the 700 mhz band —for other uses . some of the channels have been assigned for public safety communications ; licenses for a few channels have been auctioned ; and the remaining licenses are slated for auction no later than january 2008 . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has assigned a value of about $12.5 billion for the auction ; many industry estimates are significantly higher . funds from the auction will initially be deposited in a fund created for that purpose , the digital television transition and public safety fund . the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) is responsible for managing the fund and for disbursements , which total approximately $10 billion . the deficit reduction act allocates $7.363 billion of auction proceeds toward closing the budget deficit , to be paid to the u.s. treasury on september 30 , 2009 .