he was succeeded by his son , ammar al - hakim . finance minister bayan jabr and other isci leaders , such as deputy president adel abd al - mahdi and constitutional review commission chair hummam al - hammoudi , are other senior isci leaders . isci is the iraqi faction with the longest and closest ties to iran . isci's leaders , including ayatollah mohammad baqr al hakim , who was killed in an august 2003 car bomb in najaf , had spent their years of exile in iran and built ties to iranian leaders . although u.s. and iraqi military operations repeatedly defeated the jam , iran perceived it as useful against the united states in the event of a u.s. - iran confrontation , particularly for its ability to kill u.s. forces with rockets and other weaponry . in 2005 , iran reportedly began arming this milita through the revolutionary guard's "qods ( jerusalem ) force," the unit that assists iranian protégé forces abroad . the sadr faction's political ties to iran were initially limited because his family remained in iraq during saddam's rule . still , the sadr clan has political and ideological ties to iran ; moqtada's cousin , mohammad baqr al sadr , founded the da'wa party in the late 1950s and was a political ally of ayatollah khomeini when khomeini was in exile in najaf ( 1964-1978 ) . baqr al sadr was hung by saddam hussein in 1980 at the start of the da'wa party rebellion against saddam's regime . moqtada is married to one of baqr al sadr's daughters . since 2008 , sadr himself has been studying in iran to elevate his religious credentials , and running his movement from there . iran recognized political value and potential leverage in sadr's faction — which had 30 total seats in the 2006-2010 parliament , a significant , dedicated following among lower - class iraqi shiites , and which built an estimated 60,000-person "mahdi army" ( jaysh al - mahdi , or jam ) militia after saddam's fall . during 2004-2008 , sadr alternately unleashed and reined in the jam as part of a strategy of challenging what he asserted is u.s. occupation of iraq . during 2005-6 , the height of sectarian conflict in iraq , jam militiamen , as well as badr fighters in and outside the isf , committed sectarian killings of sunnis , which accelerated after the february 2006 bombing of the al askari mosque in samarra . iran's influence in iraq remains substantial but it has waned from a high point in 2005-2008 . some experts have long predicted that iran's influence would fade as iraq asserts its nationhood , as the security situation has improved , and as arab - persian differences reemerge . many experts point out that iraqi shiites generally stayed loyal to the iraqi regime during the 1980-1988 iran - iraq war . najaf , relatively secure and prosperous , might eventually meet pre - war expectations that it would again exceed iran's qom as the heart of the shiite theological world . as noted , some of these trends are starting to appear , but it is unlikely that anything close to the enmity that existed when saddam hussein was in power will return .