, the cost of the property with certain adjustments ) . the taxpayer may only claim a deduction to the extent that the loss from the casualty exceeds ( 1 ) $100 plus ( 2 ) the sum of 10% of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income and any taxable gains from property that was involuntarily converted due to a casualty ( discussed above ) . in general , the deduction may only be claimed in the year of the loss , although a loss in a presidentially declared disaster zone may be deducted in the year prior to the loss . section 402 waives the $100 and 10% floors for casualty losses from hurricane katrina . under irc â§â§ 7508 and 7508a , the irs has the authority to postpone tax - related deadlines for certain taxpayers , including those affected by a presidentially declared disaster . these deadlines include those for filing returns and making payments for income , gift , and estate taxes . income taxes withheld at source and employment taxes are explicitly excluded , and excise taxes are not mentioned . section 403 gives the irs the authority to postpone deadlines related to employment and excise taxes . additionally , while the irs announced in news release ir - 2005-96 that it would extend deadlines for hurricane katrina victims until january 3 , 2006 , section 403 further extends the deadlines to february 28 , 2006 . mortgage revenue bonds are tax - exempt bonds used to finance below - market rate mortgages for low and moderate - income homebuyers who have not owned a home for the past three years . section 104 contains transition rules for plans adopting these new provisions . when all or part of a debt is forgiven , the amount of the cancellation is ordinarily included in the income of the taxpayer receiving the benefit of the discharge . there are currently several exceptions to the general rule that a cancelled debt is included in taxable income in the year of discharge . for example , no amount of the discharge is included in income if the cancellation is intended to be a gift or is from the discharge of student loans for the performance of qualifying services . there are also certain situations in which the taxpayer may defer taxation , with the possibility of permanent exclusion , on income from the discharge of indebtedness , such as if discharge occurs when the debtor is in title 11 bankruptcy proceedings or insolvent . section 401 allows victims of hurricane katrina to exclude non - business debt that was forgiven by a governmental agency or certain financial institutions if the discharge occurred between august 24 , 2005 , and january 1 , 2007 . individuals are eligible for this benefit if their principal place of abode on august 25 , 2005 , was in the core disaster area or if it was in the hurricane katrina disaster area and they suffered an economic loss due to the hurricane . the exclusion does not apply if the real property that secured the debt was located outside of the hurricane katrina disaster area .