2461 , et seq. ) the government accountability office ( gao ) has published a series of reports highlighting the perceived benefits and shortcomings of u.s. preference programs , including gsp . amendments to gsp followed extensive debate about the program during the 109 th congress . specifically , some in congress questioned the inclusion of certain more advanced "beneficiary developing countries" ( bdcs ) under gsp and also commented that certain countries had contributed to the ongoing impasse in multilateral trade talks in the wto doha development agenda . in response to these concerns , both congress and the previous administrations have made changes to the program regarding product coverage ( eg , the type of products that can be imported under the program ) and country eligibility ( eg , limiting gsp benefits to certain countries ) . changes made to gsp in the past decade have affected the overall distribution and volume of both agricultural and non - agricultural product imports under the program . the suspension from gsp of some countries , such as argentina , likely has had an impact on agricultural trade under the program . argentina had been among the main beneficiary countries under gsp and in earlier years accounted for more than one - tenth of all agricultural imports under gsp ( ranked by import value ) . in 2012 , argentina had exported $116 million of agricultural products under the program , accounting for nearly 5% of the total value of gsp agricultural imports . products imported from argentina under gsp included casein , olive oil , prepared meats , gelatin derivatives , cheese and curd , sugar confectionery , wine , and other food products . other countries whose gsp beneficiary status has been suspended or who have graduated out of the program had not been major suppliers of u.s. agricultural imports under the program . aside from changes made to the list of eligible gsp countries , other statutory changes to gsp tightening rules for cnl waivers may not have greatly affected u.s. agricultural imports under the program . historically , there have been few cnl waivers for agricultural products imported duty - free under gsp . other types of program changes , however , could affect u.s. agricultural imports under the program , including additional limits on cnl waivers from certain countries or graduation of some beneficiary countries . some african cotton - producing nations are now eligible to supply certain cotton products to the united states , but data are not yet available to determine whether imports will consequently increase under these new categories . although ustr has continued to conduct annual reviews of the program , it has not conducted a broad review that has solicited extensive stakeholder comment . however , previous comments submitted to ustr as part of its 2006 review from u.s. agricultural industry groups indicate that opinions vary among u.s. agricultural groups regarding the program . for example , the american farm bureau federation ( afbf ) expressed its general opposition to the gsp program , stating that products imported duty - free under the program compete with u.s. - produced goods without granting a commensurate level of opportunity for u.s. producers in foreign markets .