for a time , pakistan sought other sources of support than the imf . the combination of high inflation and high unemployment apparently has contributed to a rise in poverty and hunger in pakistan . the next three answers , in order , were: poverty ( 7% ) , electricity and water ( 7% ) , and law and order ( 3% ) . as previously mentioned , the u.s. government considers a stable pakistan important for several reasons . during her february 2009 trip to asia , secretary of state hillary clinton asserted that the current economic crisis , if left unresolved , could "breed instability. in reference to the situation in pakistan , secretary clinton said , "if pakistan becomes more financially unstable , that increases the danger that we will face from the threat by the extremists to the pakistan government. several recent events and trends may have harmed u.s. relations with pakistan . although the united states provides both military and humanitarian assistance ( $968 million in fy2008 ) , pakistan is increasingly turning to other friendly nations — such as china and saudi arabia — for support . pakistan's trade relations have shifted so that china is its largest trading partner , followed by saudi arabia and the united states . suicide bombings was third ( 10% ) , even though the bombing of the islamabad marriott hotel — which resulted in the death of 53 people — had occurred less than a month before the survey was conducted . however , the united states remains pakistan's largest export market . in addition , u.s. military incursions into pakistani territory and the signing of nuclear cooperation agreement with india have created tension in u.s. - pakistan relations . also , some pakistani analysts think the united states orchestrated the negotiations with the imf and the friends of pakistan to force pakistan to accept the tougher imf conditions . even before pakistan's capital crisis began , some analysts maintained that there was a need for the united states to demonstrate its commitment to a stable and democratic pakistan with an increase in non - military assistance . others think that the united states should condition additional aid on pakistan increasing its commitment to combat islamist militancy along its border with afghanistan . with regard to pakistan's current capital crisis and its ongoing economic problems , there are several approaches available to congress — if it opts to take action . these approaches range from the provision of short - term assistance to a longer term commitment to economic support to alterations in current trade policies designed to bolster trade with pakistan . to assist pakistan with its current capital crisis , congress could pass legislation providing some or all of its estimated $2 billion - $7 billion shortfall . there have been press reports that senator kerry will introduce legislation providing pakistan with $4 billion - $5 billion in emergency assistance . however , these reports may have conflated the recommendations of the atlantic council report — which senator kerry co - chaired with ex - senator chuck hagel — with expectations that senator kerry and senator richard lugar will reintroduce the ''enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2008" ( s. 3263 in the 110 th congress ) .