child exploitation enterprises . production of obscene material . obscenity or pornography in internet source codes . the amendments to federal criminal procedure are a bit more numerous and somewhat more likely to implicate crimes in addition to those committed against children . among their number are: random searches of sex offender registrants as a condition of probation or supervised release . expanded dna collection from those facing federal charges or convicted of any federal offense . elimination of the statute of limitations for various sexual crimes or crimes committed against a child . participation of state crime victims in federal habeas proceedings . study of the elimination of marital privileges in abuse cases . preventive detention in cases involving a minor victim or a firearm . compensation for guardians ad litem . government control of evidence in pornography cases . forfeiture procedures in obscenity , exploitation and pornography cases . murder during course of various sex offenses as a felony murder predicate . civil commitment procedure for federal sex offenders . the act's penalty enhancements are the most extensive of its amendments to federal criminal law and procedure . it establishes new sentencing ranges for the federal crimes of murder , kidnaping , maiming , or aggravated assault when the victim is a child . in the case of murder , the penalty is imprisonment for any term of years not less than 30 years , imprisonment for life , or death ; in the case of kidnaping or maiming , imprisonment for life or any term of years not less than 25 years ; and in the case of aggravated assault , imprisonment for life or any term of years not less than 10 years . while the new minimums terms of imprisonment must yield to any otherwise applicable higher mandatory minimum , the new maximum penalties trump any otherwise applicable maximum . the provision has the effect of making capital offenses out of several federal murder statutes that heretofore were punishable only by a term of imprisonment when the victim is a child and when the misconduct involves the intentional killing of the victim or a reckless , fatal act of violence . the act increases penalties for several other child offenses including . the act establishes , reinforces , and revives several grant programs devoted to child and community safety , including the following . big brothers big sisters of america ( authorizing appropriations totaling $58.5 million through fy2011 ) . national police athletic league ( authorizing appropriations totaling $64 million through fy2010 ) . state , local and tribal governments in order to outfit sex offenders with electronic monitoring devices ( authorizing appropriations totaling $15 million through fy2009 ) . public and private entities that assist in treatment of juvenile sex offenders or that assist the states in their enforcement of sex offender registration requirements ( authorizing appropriations totaling $30 million through fy2009 ) . facilitating the prosecution of cases cleared as a consequence of the dna backlog elimination ( authorizing necessary appropriations through fy2011 ) . law enforcement agencies to combat sexual abuse of children ( authorizing necessary appropriations through fy2009 ) . a private nonprofit entity for a program of crime prevention media campaign ( authorizing appropriations totaling $34 million through fy2010 ) .