this would replace the notch with a slope . depending on the specifics of the phase - in , the approach could result in total expenditures that are higher or lower . for example , if the reduction were phased in at the rate of one percentage point per year , beginning with a 1% reduction for those born after december 31 , 1960 , a 2% reduction for those born after december 31 , 1961 , etc. , there would be no notch , and savings would be greater than under the original proposal . some members have complained that tscl has misled seniors about the issue in mailings that solicit money . a few veterans' groups and grassroots notch groups also have supported notch legislation . most other organizations representing older americans , led by aarp , have opposed notch legislation . the afl - cio , the national association of manufacturers , and the national taxpayers union also have come out in opposition , as did the carter , reagan , and george h. w. bush administrations . the clinton administration , the george w. bush administration , and , to date , the obama administration have taken no position . one lesson from the experience of the notch babies is that almost any change to social security benefits can create a notch . whenever benefits increase or decrease at some specific point along a continuum — most commonly a point defined by date of birth , income , or assets — a notch or "cliff" can result at the point on the continuum where the benefits rise or fall . for example , if benefits are increased for everyone born before ( or after ) a certain date , a downward notch in benefits will occur for beneficiaries whose date of birth is after ( or before ) that date . notches are quite common in means - tested programs , such as supplemental security income ( ssi ) , in which benefits are conditioned on having income or assets under a certain threshold . for example if an aged or disabled person who lives alone has no other income and has assets of less than $2,000 , he or she is eligible for a federal ssi benefit of $674 per month in 2011 . if he or she has assets of $2,001 , then the individual is ineligible for benefits in that month . an alternative to creating a "notch" or "cliff" in benefits would be to phase in the change in benefits over a range , whether it be a range of birth years , a range of income , or a range of assets . the disadvantages of phasing in changes in benefit levels over a range of birth years , income or assets , are that it can target the desired change less precisely and can sometimes raise the total cost of the program . take , for example , a hypothetical proposal to reduce the deficit of the social security trust funds by reducing the benefits of all old - age beneficiaries born after 1969 by 10% . this would create a notch based on one's date of birth .