the other categories , however , overlap . by definition , the priority nmes and new blas category is a subset of the all priority ndas and blas . for the fast track ndas , at least 87% are counted in the priority nda group and at least 68% are also counted in the priority nme group . missing data: data available for analysis come from approved applications . similar criteria apply to drugs that fda gives priority review status . fda granted the designation to 74.5% of those drug requests and 63.6% of those biologics requests . of products with fast track designation , fda eventually approved 10.6% of the drugs and licensed 17.7% of the biologics . what that means is obscured by what we do not know: for what percentage of products with fast track designation do sponsors submit nda / blas ? these applications received either a standard review or a priority review , and the review times for these two procedures are summarized in the first two pairs of data columns in the table . the third pair of columns summarizes review times for approved nda / bla applications for products that received a fast track designation . are products that receive fast track designation more likely to have their nda / bla approved by fda than products that receive no such designation ? the answer is we don't know , because , while fda provides statistics on the products it designates as fast track , it does not make public information on the nda / blas it receives unless and until the product is approved / licensed . what we do know from material on the fda website: manufacturers have requested fast track designation for 569 drugs and 195 biological products since the fast track program was set into law . how many nda / blas submitted each year are for fast track products ? with only the numerator ( approved products ) , one cannot calculate the percentage of nda / bla submissions that are approved among fast track products . fda receives approximately 100-130 applications a year , and has stated that "close to 80 percent of all filed applications will eventually be approved. the 10.6 and 17.7% figures for fast track are not a comparable statistic because they include the apparently large , but unquantified , number of product development attempts that manufacturers discontinue ( for safety problems , lack of effectiveness , business decisions , competing projects ) . a useful analysis would account for the percentage of fast track and non - fast track products of which fda is aware ( eg , that have inds ) that result in submitted nda / blas . how long it takes from the time a sponsor applies for marketing permission to the moment fda makes its decision varies greatly . the length matters to the sponsor and its stockholders , to potential consumers and healthcare providers , and to fda . two factors contribute to longer review times: review staff constraints at fda , and the quality and completeness of applications when they are first submitted . pdufa and its three reauthorizations have addressed the staffing issue by authorizing industry user fees to support fda reviewers .