pt . among other things , the final rule sets forth a four - tier labeling system for organic foods . under this system , the type of labeling permitted on a product varies according to the percentage of organic ingredients it contains . the labeling scheme distinguishes: products containing 100% organic ingredients , which may be labeled "100 percent organic" ; ( 2 ) products containing 94 to 100% organic ingredients , which may be labeled "organic" ; ( 3 ) products containing 70 to 94% organic ingredients , which may be labeled "made with organic ( specified ingredients or food group ( s ) ) " ; and ( 4 ) products containing less than 70% percent organic ingredients , which may identify each organic ingredient on the label or in the ingredient statement with the word "organic. in october 2002 , mr. arthur harvey filed a pro se suit against the usda in the u.s. district court for the district of maine , alleging that multiple provisions of the final rule were inconsistent with the ofpa and the administrative procedures act . the district court ruled in favor of the usda ( i.e. , granted summary judgment ) on all nine counts brought by harvey . harvey subsequently appealed the case to the first circuit and was supported by a number of public interest groups that filed "friends of the court" or amici curiae briefs . the first circuit sided with harvey on three counts and remanded the holdings to the district court for further action . in brief , the court found that: nonorganic ingredients not commercially available in organic form but used in the production of items labeled "organic" must have individual reviews in order to be placed on the national list of allowed and prohibited substances ; synthetic substances are barred in the processing or handling of products labeled "organic" ; and dairy herds converting to organic production are not allowed to be fed feed that is only 80% organic for the first nine months of a one - year conversion . the three holdings did not invalidate ofpa provisions , but rather , qualified or invalidated agency regulations , thereby affecting the implementation of the national organic program . on june 9 , 2005 , the district court issued an order pursuant to the circuit court's instructions that established a two - year time frame in which the secretary of agriculture was to create and enforce new rules for the implementation of the national organic program in compliance with the circuit court's ruling . under the order , the secretary was to issue new regulations within a year ( june 9 , 2006 ) but has an additional year to start enforcing them ( june 9 , 2007 ) . the phase - in implementation was selected by the court in an effort to prevent consumer confusion , commercial disruption , and unnecessary litigation . the rulings in harvey and subsequent requirements for new regulations , however , were superceded in part , as a result of amendments made to the ofpa by the fy2006 agriculture appropriations act ( p.l . on june 7 , 2006 , the usda published revised final rules based on harvey and the amended ofpa .