this trend is being reversed slightly with rising energy import prices . the average monthly price of imported oil continues to be volatile , making it difficult to determine when and at what level the price will stabilize in 2018 . oil futures markets seem to indicate a belief that the price will stabilize around $63 per barrel through 2018 , although these contract prices are lagging behind market prices . the ubiquitous nature of oil in the economy generally means that changes in energy prices will affect the u.s. rate of inflation and the rate of economic growth . lower energy prices also are expected to aid consumers by increasing their real incomes and to aid some businesses . how consumers respond to lower energy costs , however , is problematic . in 2015 , consumers reportedly responded to lower energy costs by slightly increasing their overall level of consumption and by increasing the saving rate and reducing credit card debt . in contrast , energy producers have responded to lower energy prices by curtailing new investments and by trimming payrolls , offsetting some of the stimulus to the economy provided by lower imported petroleum prices . oil prices in 2013 averaged less than those in 2012 ; combined with a decline in the volume of imported oil , this resulted in a decline in the role of energy imports in the nation's trade deficit from 40% of the overall deficit in 2012 to 33% in 2013 , as indicated in figure 2 . crude oil comprises the largest share by far within the broad category of energy - related imports . the impact on the u.s. merchandise trade deficit also is not straightforward . while lower imported energy prices reduce the energy component of the trade accounts , the overall value of exports and imports is determined by a number of factors , including the international exchange value of the dollar , the domestic balance of saving and investment , and relative rates of growth in demand for exports and imports . consequently , while the energy component of the u.s. trade deficit has fallen appreciably , the overall u.s. trade deficit has not . if the rate of growth in the u.s. economy , even at low rates , outpaces that of its trading partners , the overall trade deficit potentially worsens even with lower energy prices due to a relatively stronger u.s. demand for imports than foreign demand for u.s. exports and an inflow of foreign capital that puts upward pressure on the value of the dollar . under such circumstances , congress potentially could face pressure to examine the causes of the trade deficit and to address the underlying domestic macroeconomic factors that are generating that deficit . despite fluctuations in oil prices and sharp drops at times in the average annual price of imported crude oil and the decline in the role of imported crude oil in the value of the u.s. trade deficit , the trade deficit itself did not change appreciably . instead , the composition of the trade deficit changed , with non - petroleum products replacing petroleum products , as indicated in figure 1 .