dod originally intended to procure three types of mraps . these included category i vehicles , capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations ; category ii vehicles , capable of carrying up to 11 personnel and intended for a variety of missions such as supporting security , convoy escort , troop or cargo transport , medical , explosive ordnance disposal , or combat engineer operations ; and category iii vehicles , intended to be used primarily to clear mines and ieds , capable of carrying up to 13 personnel . the army and marines first employed mraps in limited numbers in iraq and afghanistan in 2003 , primarily for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal ( eod ) operations . all countries that are loaned mraps can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles . loaning unused mraps to coalition partners could not only help to reduce allied casualties but can also help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of these vehicles . it was reported that pentagon agreed to loan 300 mraps in afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently fighting in afghanistan . approximately 85 mraps are already out on loan to poland , romania , georgia , and the czech republic . while dod leadership notes that there are 450 additional requirements that the mraps and m - atvs cannot meet , thereby justifying the jltv program , some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs , particularly in light of anticipated defense budget cuts . if the services continue to look for "the next best thing" in terms of tactical wheeled vehicles instead of committing to the m - atv and jltv programs , they could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the hmmwv fleet . the use of larger and more lethal ieds by afghan insurgents has necessitated adding additional armor to m - atvs . while this course of action is intended to provide additional protection for the vehicle's occupants , it might also result in a less maneuverable vehicle that might be too heavy for many afghan roads ( the main reason why many mraps deployed to afghanistan are not in use ) and perhaps more prone to roll over accidents . congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified m - atvs in greater detail with dod to ensure that a proper balance between protection and operational utility is reached . another consideration is whether unused mraps — even if less maneuverable than m - atvs — might be used on certain afghan routes that can accommodate their weight . substituting mraps whenever operationally feasible might be a more timely and cost - effective option as opposed to dod's plans to arbitrarily uparmor approximately 7,000 m - atvs . these route clearance mraps quickly gained a reputation for providing superior protection for their crews , and some suggested that mraps might be a better alternative for transporting troops in combat than up - armored hmmwvs .