appendix a . major federal food safety agencies and selected laws appendix b . selected comparison of fsis and fda responsibilitie . meat inspection remained in usda . there has been discussion over time regarding whether this dispersal of food safety responsibilities has been problematic , or whether a reorganization would divert time and attention from other fundamental problems in the system . figure 1 shows this history by providing a timeline of selected important dates for food safety in the united states . over the years , gao has published a series of reports highlighting how food safety oversight in the united states is fragmented and recommending broad restructuring of the nation's food safety system . these gao reports document examples where a number of federal agencies are responsible for some aspect of food safety or product quality , resulting in split agency jurisdiction for some foods . it required food processing , manufacturing , shipping , and other facilities to conduct food safety plans of the most likely safety hazards and design and implement risk - based controls . it also mandated improvements to the nation's foodborne illness surveillance systems and increased scrutiny of food imports , among other provisions . fsma did not directly address meat and poultry products under usda's jurisdiction . although congress authorized appropriations when it enacted fsma , it did not provide the funding needed for fda to perform these activities , and fda funding for fsma implementation and other food safety activities has been lower than what agency officials have said is needed to fully implement the law . previously , fda reported that an additional $400 million to $450 million per year above the fy2012 base is needed to fully implement fsma . the enacted fy2016 agriculture appropriation provided for a $104.5 million increase in budget authority for fda's food safety activities , including fsma implementation . for additional information , see crs report r44309 , fy2016 appropriations: selected federal food safety agencies . although fda has been responsible for 80% - 90% of the u.s. food supply , a few years ago it received about 40% of the combined budget for federal food safety activities ( table 1 ) . staffing levels also have varied considerably among the two agencies: fsis staff numbered around 9,400 ftes in fy2010 , while fda staff working on food - related activities numbers about 3,400 ftes . in recent years , however , the balance of overall funding for food safety between fda and usda has started to shift . congressional appropriators have increased funding for fda food activities , which more than doubled from $435.5 million in fy2005 to $987.3 million in fy2016 ( table 1 ) . funding for fsis remained mostly unchanged to slightly lower overall . the food safety modernization act ( fsma ) also provided for additional limited funding through certain types of industry - paid user fees . fsma — comprehensive food safety legislation enacted in the 111 th congress — authorized additional appropriations and staff for fda's future food safety activities . fsma was the largest expansion of fda's food safety authorities since the 1930s .