appropriators ( p.l . 110-329 ) also supported the army funding while removing the air force advance procurement funds and $10 million in rdt&e money that was "unexecutable. house authorizers ( h.rept . the following sections address these differences . jca critics state that dod already has sufficient options for tactical airlift . the 2009 defense authorization act supported the army portions of the request , but cut all of the advance procurement funds and $10 million of rdt&e funds from the air force request . 110-652 ) pointed to the results of the aforementioned iafma as one cause for removing funds and questioned the lack of analysis done to justify air force procurement of jca . the president requested $157 million for army procurement and $42.3 million for air force rdt&e . house authorizers ( h.rept . 110-146 ) supported the request but stipulated that dod could not obligate funds until requirements analysis was complete . senate authorizers ( s.rept . 110-77 ) also supported the funding request , but transferred funds from the army into the air force's procurement account and questioned the army's need for an organic fixed - wing airlift fleet , stating if there were a pattern of the joint forces air component commander ( jfacc ) providing support that did not match the priorities of the joint forces land component commander ( jflcc ) , that would certainly argue for intervention of the joint forces commander to correct the situation . it would not be a persuasive argument that the jflcc should have his own air force . the 2008 defense authorization act restored army procurement funds , but directed dod to conduct a roles and missions review ( p.l . appropriators supported the president's request for procurement but cut $21.3 million from rdt&e as an "unjustified request" ( p.l . the president requested $109.2 million for army procurement and $15.8 million for air force procurement . authorizers supported the request but transferred procurement funding to the air force's account ( p.l . appropriators cut funding for army jca to $72.2 million and transferred air force procurement dollars into the air force's rdt&e account ( p.l . echoing comments from the 2007 defense authorization bill , senate appropriators ( s.rept . 109-292 ) expressed a desire for additional analyses of intra - theater airlift requirements . the president requested $4.9 million for jca lead procurement , and both authorizers ( p.l . 109-148 ) and appropriators ( p.l . 109-163 ) fully supported the request . some suggest the air force could have a more versatile system by diverting funds planned for jca into procuring larger tactical airlift models such as c - 130s and c - 17s , a view backed up by the iafma results . others assert that the army's helicopter modernization program may require a 50% larger budget between 2007-2030 compared with 1986-2005 and suggest the army could better use jca dollars by modernizing its helicopter fleet . accordingly , the services are also pursuing a joint heavy lift program that would replace current large - helicopter fleets and could perform this "last tactical mile" mission . a separate ( but related ) possibility for accomplishing this mission is a precision airdrop system .