restitution is a creature of statute . a court may order reimbursement only for those losses authorized by statute . sections 3663 and 3663a recognize three categories of reimbursable losses: property losses , losses relating to bodily injuries , and losses relating to participation in the investigation or prosecution of the victimizing offense . what crimes trigger restitution authority ? as originally cast , ยง3663 authorized restitution for "any victim" of any crime proscribed in title 18 of the united states code , but did not define the term "victim. the supreme court read the statute narrowly and concluded that restitution might only extend to harm attributable to the crime of conviction . congress endorsed this view almost immediately with a more explicit statement of ยง3663's coverage . it replicated and enlarged that statement when it enacted ยง3663a six years later . sections 3663 and 3663a authorize restitution orders for the benefit of the victims of the crime of conviction , and now expressly define the term "victim" ( i.e. , "a person directly and proximately harmed as a result of the commission of an offense for which restitution may be ordered" ) . a victim is also someone harmed by a scheme , conspiracy , or pattern of activity that is an element of the crime of conviction . and , a victim may be someone whom the government and the defendant agree in a plea bargain is entitled to restitution . harm is directly caused by the defendant's offense of conviction when the harm would not have occurred but for that misconduct . first , it means the former event caused the latter.... every event has many causes , however , and only some of them are proximate... . so to say that one event was a proximate cause of another means that it was not just any cause , but one with a sufficient connection to the result . the idea of proximate cause.... is a flexible concept , that generally refers to the basic requirement that there must be some direct relation between the injury asserted and injurious conduct alleged.... proximate cause is often explicated in terms of foreseeability or the scope of the risk created by the predicate conduct . a requirement of proximate cause thus serves , inter alia , to preclude liability in situations where the causal link between conduct and result is so attenuated that the consequence is more aptly described as mere fortuity . directly caused harm is proximately caused when there is no attenuation between the crime and the harm ; when the harm and but - for misconduct are closely , not remotely , related in time and fact . the presence of an intervening cause of the harm may suggest a want of either direct causation , or proximate causation , or both . the presence of an intervening cause will defeat an assertion of direct and proximate harm unless intervening cause is related to or a foreseeable consequence of the offense of conviction . what type of injuries or losses does restitution cover ?