the age requirement was removed in 1960 . in recent years , congress has introduced a variety of legislative initiatives to reduce or eliminate the five - month waiting period . the five - month waiting period between the onset of disability and eligibility for ssdi may have a negative impact on the income of those seeking to enter the program . during this waiting period , persons with disabilities are either not working or earning less than the substantial gainful activity ( sga ) threshold . in addition , claimants are either not receiving monthly benefits to replace lost wages or are receiving only ssi benefits , which are usually lower than ssdi benefits . a july 2012 analysis by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that the elimination of the five - month waiting period would increase outlays to ssdi by approximately $8.0 billion dollars in 2022 ( about 4% of program outlays ) . one impact that may not be as clear , however , is the role that the waiting period plays in discouraging possible beneficiaries from applying for benefits . this waiting period , and its accompanying loss of income , lessen the overall generosity of the ssdi benefit . a waiting period from the onset of disability to eligibility for benefits has been part of the ssdi program from its inception . in 1954 , congress made the first provisions for loss of work due to disability and included language that exempted a period of disability from being counted when determining retirement benefits . two years later , congress authorized the payment of ssdi benefits to persons over the age of 50 after a six - month waiting period . title ii of the social security act provides that certain individuals may be entitled to social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) benefits under the federal old age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program if they meet the following statutory requirements: the individual's medical condition meets the definition of disability as specified in section 216 of the act ; the individual has filed a claim for disability benefits ; the individual is insured , generally requiring either a work history or the work history of a parent or spouse , as specified in section 214 of the act ; the individual has not reached normal retirement age as provided in section 216 of the act ; and the individual has completed a five - month waiting period .