2912-2914 of the existing law . these sections authorized the 2005 round and include , among other provisions , the statutory installation selection criteria . the recommended legislation would have repealed sec . failure to do so would terminate the brac round . national priorities list ( npl ) sites . npl sites and other installations present particularly difficult environmental remediation challenges necessitating long - term management and oversight . the 2005 commission report proposed that this study examine freeing the department , after a set period , to withdraw from unsuccessful title transfer negotiations with local redevelopment authorities in order to seek other partners . it also envisioned potential department contracts with private environmental insurance carriers after the completion of remediation in order to mitigate risk of future liability . the study could have considered the advisability of crafting a financial "toolbox," similar in concept to the special authorizations granted to the department of defense in the creation of the military housing privatization initiative , in order to expedite the disposal of challenging properties . other alternatives studied were the creation of public - private partnerships , limited - liability corporations , or independent trusteeships to take title to and responsibility for properties . the commission would have consulted closely with the department of defense , the military departments , the comptroller general of the united states , the environmental protection agency , and the bureau of land management , department of the interior , in preparing its study and report . copies may be furnished to members of the public at cost upon request and may also be provided via electronic media in a form that may be designated by the commission. it would continue the traditional practice of opening all unclassified hearings and meetings of the commission to the public and provides for official transcripts , certified by the chairman , to be made available to the public . existing law requires all brac implementation actions to be completed not later than six years after the date that the president transmitted the current commission's report , or september 15 , 2011 . the recommended legislation would have required the commission to submit a final report on the execution of these actions not later than october 31 , 2011 . the recommended legislation included other provisions suggested by the experience of the 2005 round . the proposed legislation would require the secretary of defense to release the supporting certified data not later than seven ( 7 ) days after forwarding his or her base closure and realignment recommendations to the congressional defense committees and the commission . the 2005 commission report notes that the four months allotted by statute for the commission to complete its work was shortened considerably by delays in staffing the commission , the appointment of commissioners , and the release of defense department certified data , among other considerations . the commission proposed legislation to extend the period to seven ( 7 ) months . the 2005 commission suggested that a future body be granted the commission the power to subpoena witness for its hearings . the commission recommended a statutory designation of the commission's general counsel as its sole ethics counselor .