certain plans may be exempt from the mhpa . plans covering employers with 50 or fewer employees are exempt from compliance . these requirements , included as part of the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 , expand the parity requirements under the current version of the mhpa for mental health and substance use disorder coverage if such coverage is offered by a group health plan . in general , the act amends section 712 of erisa , as well as other federal laws , to require parity between mental health / substance use disorder benefits and medical / surgical benefits in terms of the predominant ( 1 ) financial requirements and ( 2 ) treatment limitations imposed by a group health plan . arra provides for cobra premium subsidies of 65% to help the unemployed afford health insurance coverage from their former employer . one of the ways that hipaa implements this goal is by amending erisa , as well as other federal laws , to limit the circumstances under which a group health plan or insurer providing group health coverage may exclude a participant or beneficiary with a preexisting condition from coverage . a preexisting condition exclusion under a group health plan or group health insurance coverage can be applicable to an individual as a result of information relating to an individual's health status before the effective date of coverage , such as a condition identified as a result of a pre - enrollment questionnaire , a physical examination given to the individual , or review of medical records relating to the pre - enrollment period . the subsidy is available for up to nine months to those individuals who meet the income test and who are involuntarily terminated from their employment on or after september 1 , 2008 , and before january 1 , 2010 . for more information on the cobra premium subsidies , see crs report r40420 , health insurance premium assistance for the unemployed: the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) added a new part 7 to title i of erisa to provide additional health plan coverage requirements . other federal legislation amended part 7 of erisa to require plans that offer specific health benefits to meet certain standards . the requirements of part 7 generally apply to group health plans , as well as health insurance issuers that offer group health insurance coverage . hipaa was enacted in 1996 in part to "improve the portability and continuity of health insurance coverage in the group and individual markets. under section 701 of erisa , as created by hipaa , an exclusion period for an individual's preexisting condition may be applied if medical advice , diagnosis , care , or treatment was recommended or received within the six months before the enrollment date in the plan . this exclusion from coverage cannot be for more than 12 months after an employee enrolls in a health plan ( or 18 months for late enrollees ) . further , this 12-month period must be reduced by the number of days that an individual has "creditable coverage," with no significant break in this coverage .