most of the other sites are located on active military installations . in october 2005 , dod promulgated regulations for prioritizing response actions among munitions sites , based primarily on potential risks . numerous factors determine the degree of risks at an individual site , such as the type of munitions present , whether munitions are located at or below the surface , the accessibility of a site , the proximity of munitions to populated areas , human health and environmental risks from potential exposure to munitions contaminants , and whether cultural or ecological resources are present . of the sites identified so far , planned response actions were complete at 920 sites as of the end of fy2007 . dod deemed that response actions likely would not be needed at 470 sites because munitions were not known or suspected to be present , or potential risks were thought to be low enough not to warrant a response . response actions were under way or planned at 1,113 sites . dod had not completed or begun its evaluation of potential risks at 1,034 sites . therefore , much remained uncertain about potential risks at those locations and the actions and funding needed to address those risks . the table shows amounts spent on the cleanup of munitions back to fy1997 . prior to that time , the costs to clean up munition sites were not broken out from the costs to clean up other hazards at non - munitions sites . the lack of a breakout of costs for each type of site prior to fy1997 makes it difficult to determine the total funds dod has expended on munitions cleanup historically . dod spent a total of $1.24 billion from fy1997 through fy2007 on the cleanup of munitions and related contamination at former training ranges and munitions disposal sites it had identified . dod estimated that another $19.23 billion would be needed from fy2008 into the future to complete outstanding cleanup actions planned at that time . cleanup at fuds sites accounts for 68% of the estimated future costs . cleanup at active installations accounts for 27% of the estimated future costs . although brac sites account for only 5% of the estimated future costs , communities seeking redevelopment of these properties have emphasized the importance of funding needs at these sites to make them safe for civilian reuse . ( see crs report rs22065 , military base closures: cleanup of contaminated properties for civilian reuse , by [author name scrubbed]. ) the above site status and costs focus on the cleanup of former training ranges and munitions disposal sites on land . munitions also are known or suspected to be present in underwater areas adjacent to some training ranges . in some cases , obsolete or damaged munitions were dumped offshore . submerged munitions generally have received less attention than munitions on land because of the perceived lower risks of human exposure . locating and removing munitions underwater also presents greater challenges , making it a more difficult and costlier undertaking than cleanup on land . challenges arising from the cleanup of munitions can be multiplied several times when munitions are found underwater .