2131 et seq. ) is intended to ensure the humane treatment of animals that are intended for research , bred for commercial sale , exhibited to the public , or commercially transported . under the awa , businesses and others with animals covered by the law must be licensed or registered , and they must adhere to minimum standards of care . farm animals are among those not covered by the act , which nonetheless provides a broad set of statutory protections for animals . the law was first passed in 1966 following several years of lobbying by animal welfare organizations and growing public outcry over allegations that large numbers of pets were being "dognapped" for sale to medical research laboratories . congress amended the original law in 1970 , 1976 , 1985 , 1990 , and 2002 . these amendments generally were intended to expand the scope of the awa or to clarify various provisions . the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) administers the awa . the house and senate agriculture committees have exercised primary legislative jurisdiction over the act and its amendments . all licensed and registered entities must comply with usda - aphis regulations , including recordkeeping and published standards of care . these standards deal with humane handling , shelter , space requirements , feeding , watering , sanitation , ventilation , veterinary care , and transport . ( awa regulations are found at 9 c.f.r . ยง1.1 et seq. ) aphis's animal care ( ac ) program oversees implementation of the awa . , breeders and brokers ) that failed to provide humane treatment for the animals under their care . in a previous audit of laboratory animals , the oig found that ac did not aggressively pursue enforcement actions against violators of awa . the may 2010 audit determined that ( 1 ) ac's enforcement process was ineffective against dealers with repeated violations ; ( 2 ) aphis misused its guidelines to lower penalties for awa violators ; and ( 3 ) some large breeders circumvented awa by selling animals over the internet . aphis concurred with the oig's findings and implemented 13 of the 14 recommendations , including a change in the definition of retail pet store to no longer exempt retail pet stores that were not selling animals in face - to - face transactions . in march 2015 , aphis filed public notices in the federal register regarding the agency's consideration of two petitions they had received that could require changes to existing awa regulations . the first petition , received in 2013 , was from the physicians committee for responsible medicine . the petition requests that aphis initiate rulemaking to add a definition of the term "alternatives" in order to define what a primary investigator at a facility using animals as research models is required to consider in lieu of a procedure that may cause more than momentary or slight pain or distress to an animal . the petition further requests that aphis amend the existing definition of "painful procedure" to codify long - standing aphis policy that a procedure should be considered painful if it may cause more than momentary or slight pain or distress to the animal .