appendix a . background on u.s. aid to the palestinians overview significant bilateral u.s. aid to the palestinians began when the palestinians achieved limited self - rule in the west bank and gaza strip in the mid - 1990s . bilateral aid to the palestinians since 1994 has totaled more than $5 billion . it was restructured in 2007 , as mentioned above , to account for hamas controlling gaza . since then , much of the u.s. bilateral aid has gone toward security , economic development , self - governance , and humanitarian needs — with an emphasis on strengthening the west bank - based , fatah - led pa vis - à - vis hamas . however , at various points , the executive branch and congress have taken various measures to reduce , delay , or place conditions on this aid . annual appropriations legislation routinely contains the following selected conditions: hamas and terrorism . aid to hamas or hamas - controlled entities is specifically prohibited , and no aid may be made available for the purpose of recognizing or otherwise honoring individuals who commit or have committed acts of terrorism . additionally , the secretary of state is required to take all appropriate steps to ensure that economic assistance for the west bank and gaza does not support terrorism , and to terminate assistance to "any individual , entity , or educational institution which the secretary has determined to be involved in or advocating terrorist activity. fatah - hamas "unity" government scenario . generally , no aid is permitted for a power - sharing pa government that includes hamas as a member , or that results from an agreement with hamas and over which hamas exercises "undue influence. this general restriction is only lifted if the president certifies that the pa government , including all ministers , has "publicly accepted and is complying with" the following two principles embodied in section 620k of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended by the palestinian anti - terrorism act of 2006 ( pata , p.l . 109-446 ) : ( 1 ) recognition of "the jewish state of israel's right to exist" and ( 2 ) acceptance of previous israeli - palestinian agreements ( the "section 620k principles" ) . if the pa government is "hamas - controlled," pata applies additional conditions , limitations , and restrictions on aid . international criminal court action . esf assistance for the pa is prohibited if "the palestinians initiate an international criminal court judicially authorized investigation , or actively support such an investigation , that subjects israeli nationals to an investigation for alleged crimes against palestinians. membership in the united nations or u.n. agencies . esf assistance for the pa is prohibited if the palestinians obtain "the same standing as member states or full membership as a state outside an agreement negotiated between israel and the palestinians" in the united nations or any u.n. specialized agency other than u.n. educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) . pa personnel in gaza . no aid is permitted for pa personnel located in gaza . plo and palestinian broadcasting corporation ( pbc ) . no aid is permitted for the plo or for the pbc . palestinian state .