since then , the renminbi has weakened against the dollar . as of march 31 , 2017 , the exchange rate was 6.89 yuan = 1.0 u.s. dollar . japan's yen has undergone major shifts in value relative to the u.s. dollar over the past 10 years , ranging from a low of 125.35 yen to the u.s. dollar in june 2015 to a high of 76.14 yen to the u.s. dollar in february 2012 ( see figure 1 ) . the fluctuations in the value of the yen have also shown some major shifts , such as its strong appreciations in late 2008 and early 2016 , or its major depreciations in the winter of 2012-2013 , the autumn of 2014 , and the end of 2016 . analysts differ on the causes for the shifting value of the japanese yen . financial news reports during that time generally maintained that the fluctuations in the value of the yen reflected market confidence ( or lack thereof ) in japan's economy and the bank of japan's monetary policy . according to these accounts , the weakening of the yen is the result of expansionary fiscal and monetary policies , part of the government's program to stimulate economic growth in japan ( "abenomics" ) . however , some u.s. business leaders assert that the decline in the value of the yen in 2015 was the result of japanese government intervention in foreign exchange markets . the abe government and the bank of japan repeatedly denied claims that they were actively attempting to lower the value of the yen relative to the u.s. dollar , asserting their economic policies are designed to stimulate growth and end price deflation . the last confirmed time japan intervened in foreign exchange markets was in 2011 . among the report's observations on these four major trading partners were the following: china — "china has a long track record of engaging in persistent , large - scale , one - way foreign exchange intervention , doing so for roughly a decade to resist renminbi ( rmb ) appreciation even as its trade and current surpluses soared. the report , however , also noted that china has allowed the renminbi to appreciate in recent years , and "china's recent intervention in foreign exchange markets has sought to prevent a rapid rmb depreciation [emphasis in original text] that would have negative consequences for the united states , china , and the global economy. japan — "japan has a significant bilateral trade surplus with the united states , with a goods surplus of $69 billion [in 2016] . japan has not intervened in the foreign exchange market , however , in five years. south korea — "korea has a track record of asymmetric foreign exchange interventions , highlighting the urgency of authorities durably limiting foreign exchange intervention only to circumstances of disorderly exchange market conditions and making foreign exchange operations more transparent . in its last analysis of the won , the imf maintained its assessment that the won is undervalued.