the historical record does not provide much guidance as to this situation . horace greeley , the 1872 presidential nominee of the democratic and liberal republican parties , died on november 29 of that year , several weeks after the november 5 election day . as it happened , 63 of the 66 greeley electors voted for other candidates , and congress declined to count the three cast for greeley on the grounds that electoral votes for a dead person were invalid . even so , the question as to the validity of the greeley electoral votes was of little concern , since the "stalwart" or "regular" republican nominee , ulysses s. grant , had won the election in a landslide , gaining 286 electoral votes . a final consideration during both the presidential election campaign period and the first part of the transition originates with the electoral college . while the party national committees may appoint a replacement to fill any vacancy in a presidential or vice presidential candidacy , they might not be able to guarantee that all electors would vote as instructed . many constitutional scholars regard presidential electors as free agents , able to vote as they please , notwithstanding pledges or other commitments to support the candidates of the party that nominated them . it is possible that individual electors , or groups of electors , might choose to ignore the instructions of the party national committee to support a replacement candidate in these circumstances . on the two previous occasions when candidates died during this period , party electors voted as instructed when the college convened . the potential for faithless might be greater , however , in the event of a closely contested election , or disputes over the national committee's choice of a replacement candidate or candidates . the second period during which succession procedures would be invoked in the event a president - elect or vice president - elect were to die or leave the ticket occurs between the time the electors vote and congress counts the electoral votes . presidential electors meet in their respective states to cast their votes on the first monday after the second wednesday in december in the year of the presidential election , which falls on december 17 in 2012 . federal law sets january 6 of the following year as the date on which congress convenes in joint session to count the electoral vote and declare the results . the succession process during this period would turn on the issue of when the candidates who received an electoral vote majority actually become president - elect and vice president - elect . the results of the electoral college are publicly known , but are the candidates who won a majority of electoral votes actually "elect" at this point , or do they attain this position only after the electoral college returns have been counted and declared by congress on january 6 ? some commentators doubt that there would be a president - and vice president - elect before the results are certified . they maintain that this contingency would lack clear constitutional or statutory direction .