110-246 ) , the farm bill . title xv includes the haitian hemispheric opportunity through partnership encouragement ( hope ) act of 2008 , which gives trade preferences to u.s. imports of haitian apparel . in late june 2008 , congress amended the mã©rida initiative , an aid package for mexico and central america that was part of the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act , h.r . 110-252 ) , to include counternarcotics funds for haiti . apparel assembly is also haiti's core export sector and essential for its economic well - being because it generates up to 80% of the country's foreign exchange used to finance haiti's large food import bill , among other needs . in 2007 , apparel constituted over 80% of haiti's total exports and 93% of exports to the united states ( 81% knit , 12% woven articles ) , so the sector provides one potential avenue for employment growth . the preferences also support textile firms in the dominican republic , which have an expanding co - production arrangement with haiti . the hope acts differ from other trade arrangements with the caribbean that emphasize apparel benefits . unlike apparel provisions in the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) , of which haiti is a beneficiary country , and the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , which does not include haiti , those in the hope acts permit duty - free treatment for apparel imports in limited quantities assembled or knit - to - shape in haiti with inputs from third - party countries , or those outside the region that are not in a trade arrangement or agreement with the united states . the competitive advantage to haitian firms derives from their ability to use less expensive asian inputs and still receive duty - free treatment . to the extent that this advantage is in place for an extended period of time , it is intended to encourage increased investment in the apparel assembly business in haiti , contributing to growth in output , employment , and exports . hope i provided three major tariff preferences for limited amounts of articles imported directly from haiti: ( 1 ) quotas for the duty - free treatment of apparel articles that meet the regional value - added content rule ( 50% rising to 60% ) , effectively allowing the remaining portion of inputs to be sourced from outside the region ; ( 2 ) additional quotas for duty - free treatment of a limited amount of woven apparel that cannot meet the 50% - 60% value - added rule ( allowing all inputs for these articles to be sourced from anywhere in the world ) ; and ( 3 ) a single transformation rule of origin that allows for duty - free treatment of brassieres made from components sourced anywhere in the world , provided the garments are cut and sewn or otherwise assembled completely in haiti , the united states , or both . hope i , however , did not result in dramatic growth in haitian textile exports to the united states , inhibited by the limited time frame and complicated rules of origin .