, the effective period of section 304 of the dwrra ) . according to kerr - mcgee , section 304 of the dwrra , which addresses lease sales during the five - year period between 1996 and 2000 , barred the inclusion of royalty relief price thresholds to these leases , and therefore the collection of royalties resulting from the imposition of price thresholds contradicted section 304 of the dwrra . kerr - mcgee brought its claim in the u.s. district court for the western district of louisiana after the doi issued an order directing kerr - mcgee to pay royalties on oil and natural gas produced in 2003 and 2004 under eight leases operated by kerr - mcgee under the dwrra . on october 30 , 2007 , the court issued a ruling that essentially confirmed kerr - mcgee's position and found that an order issued by the doi directing kerr - mcgee to pay royalties based on a price threshold was in error . the court based its ruling on a decision issued by the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit in 2004 that interpreted the relevant sections of the dwrra . based on the fifth circuit's previous ruling , the district court found that section 304 mandates royalty relief up to a certain minimum volume of production , regardless of the market price of oil or natural gas . therefore , the court concluded that the doi had "exceeded its congressional authority" when it sought to collect royalties on kerr - mcgee's oil and gas production that did not exceed these volumetric minimums , regardless of whether the oil and gas produced could be sold at prices in excess of the price thresholds for royalty relief that had been included in the lease terms . since the kerr - mcgee ruling was issued on october 30 , 2007 , there has been extensive congressional interest in the impact of the ruling on the proposed royalty relief for american consumers act of 2007 , as described above . specifically , there is confusion as to how the ruling might affect the restrictions that section 7504 seeks to impose on holders of "covered leases. as discussed above , section 7504 requires that persons who hold "covered leases" either: ( 1 ) renegotiate their leases to include price thresholds ; ( 2 ) pay a "conservation of resources" fee as set forth in the section ; or ( 3 ) forfeit eligibility for future oil or gas production leases in the gulf of mexico . section 7504 and the legislative efforts that preceded it have generally been described as efforts to remedy a perceived "error" or "oversight" in the 1998 and 1999 deep water leases by forcing renegotiation of those leases to include royalty relief price thresholds , or by using the "conservation of resources" fee structure to recover from these leaseholders amounts that had previously been calculated to be roughly the same amount as would be owed if price thresholds had been in place .