, the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) ) . to this end , the uraa approves the agreements and contains provisions "necessary or appropriate" to implement them , including provisions setting out new and revised authorities as well as any needed repeals . in addition , section 102 of the uraa , as well as its legislative history , indicates that domestic law supersedes any inconsistent provisions of wto agreements approved and implemented in the uraa and that wto decisions involving u.s. laws or regulatory actions that are successfully challenged in the wto do not have direct or automatic legal effect in the united states . congress approved and implemented the wto agreement and the other agreements negotiated in the uruguay round in the uruguay round agreement act ( uraa ) . in enacting the uraa , congress comprehensively dealt with the legal effect in the united states of both the uruguay round agreements and wto decisions adverse to the united states resulting from dispute settlement proceedings under the new dsu . the uraa addresses the relationship of wto agreements to federal and state law and prohibits private remedies based on alleged violations of wto agreements . it also requires the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to keep congress informed of disputes challenging u.s. laws once a dispute panel is established , any u.s. appeal is filed , and a panel or appellate body report is circulated to wto members . in addition , the uraa places requirements on agencies taking domestic regulatory action to implement wto decisions , including provisions specific to successfully challenged agency determinations in u.s. trade remedy proceedings . as is the case with previous trade agreements , including the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and the gatt tokyo round agreements , congress considers the uruguay round agreements to be non - self - executing ; that is , their legal effect in the united states is based on their implementing legislation ( i.e. instead , specific congressional or administrative action , as the case may be , is required to implement these wto decisions . the uruguay round agreements act sets out procedures that agencies must follow in implementing wto decisions that are adverse to the united states when existing statutes may allow them to do so . section 123 of the uraa addresses regulatory modifications in general , while section 129 addresses the issuing of new determinations in certain domestic trade remedy proceedings . in some cases , implementation of a wto decision may involve the exercise of authorities under both provisions . although private rights of action based on uruguay round agreements are precluded under section 102 ( c ) of the uraa , wto panel findings have at times been brought to the attention of federal courts , most often in challenges to agency determinations in antidumping and countervailing duty proceedings brought under judicial review provisions contained in section 516a of the tariff act of 1930 . section 129 determinations issued by the usitc and the commerce department to comply with wto decisions are also reviewable under this statute . these cases are heard in the u.s. court of international trade ( uscit ) , which has exclusive jurisdiction over civil actions brought under section 516a .