this caveat may also apply to fema . in the case of usace and msc , the department of defense ( dod ) has not completed its connections to fpds , though it expects to do so sometime in fy2006 . thus , very few dod contracting actions are listed on the hurricane katrina spreadsheet . while the information presented here applies to government procurements generally , the information is provided to aid specifically in understanding the fpds spreadsheets . information listed on the fpds spreadsheets includes the date that a transaction was signed ; the date that the parties ( that is , the government and a company ) agreed would be the starting date for the contract's requirements , which may be the same as the date signed ; the current completion date , which is the completion date of the base contract plus any options that have been exercised ; the dollar value of the contract or other award ; and the name and location of the vendor . although the definition of "current completion date" does not mention , for example , delivery orders ( dos ) , it seems likely that completion date entries for dos indicate the date by which deliveries are to be completed . the data provided through the fpds website and the other websites listed above provide a degree of transparency in what is often a murky process and can be used to analyze hurricane - related recovery procurements . ( the military sealift command is the agency that awarded four contracts for four cruise ships to house evacuees in the gulf region. ) the federal procurement data system is a government database that contains detailed information about contracts that have been awarded ; task , delivery , and purchase orders that have been issued ; and purchases that have been made under blanket purchase agreements ( bpas ) . three spreadsheets are available on the fpds website: hurricane katrina contract information , hurricane rita contract information , and contract information for other disasters that occurred in 2005 . although agencies are required to submit information to fpds about contracts and other types of awards that exceed $2,500 in value , it is likely , as noted at the beginning of the three spreadsheets available on the fpds website , that not all contracting actions have been entered into fpds yet . nevertheless , with more than 2,500 contracting actions listed by late october from many different agencies , and the use of 50 fpds data elements to describe the contracting actions , fpds spreadsheets offer the most comprehensive picture of emergency contracting . contracting information available from the other three sources — fema ( via the dhs website ) , usace , and msc — is not included in the fpds spreadsheets . as noted on the fpds spreadsheets , some contracting officials may not have access to the necessary computer systems or may not have time to submit information to fpds . ( information about contracts awarded by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) is available at this website. ) u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) , at http: / / www.usace.army.mil .