the irs disallowed the loss . the district court agreed with bdc's characterization of the transaction . the court stated that , under fourth circuit precedent , the question was whether "the taxpayer was motivated by no business purpose other than obtaining tax benefits in entering the transaction , and that the transaction has no economic substance because no reasonable possibility of profit exists. the fact that the taxpayer's sole motivation was tax avoidance was undisputed . with respect to the test's objective second prong , the court stated it would be met if the business engaged in "bona fide economically - based business transactions. the court found that the transaction met this standard because it had "very real economic implications" for the health plan participants and the businesses involved in the transaction because the subsidiary had assumed the administration of the benefit plans , was responsible for paying the claims , had proposed cost containment strategies that had been implemented , and had always had salaried employees . thus , the court found that the transaction had economic substance and granted bdc's motion for summary judgment . the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit disagreed with the district court . because bdc had conceded the subjective prong of the test , the court looked only at the objective prong . the appeals court stated that the lower court had misapplied that prong by focusing on the subsidiary's business activities , when the test actually required looking at whether the transaction had a reasonable expectation of profit outside of the tax benefits . the court therefore found that many of the facts upon which the district court had based its decision ( eg , the fact that the subsidiary had salaried employees and paid claims as they came due ) were irrelevant . thus , the court reversed the district court's decision and remanded the case for further proceedings to determine the economic substance issue . dow entered into a plan under which it bought corporate - owned life insurance ( coli ) policies , of which it was the owner and beneficiary , on the lives of more than 21,000 employees . the company paid the premiums by borrowing funds from the insurers using the policies' cash value as collateral and by making partial withdrawals from the policies' cash value . the plan was not expected to generate positive pre - deduction cash flows or earn significant inside build - up ( i.e. , earn interest on the policies' value ) unless dow made substantial investments of cash into the plan . the plan also limited dow's potential mortality gain ( i.e. , its potential to profit by being paid more death benefits than expected because of a high number of deaths ) . dow deducted more than $33 million for interest paid on loans used to pay the premiums . the irs disallowed the deductions , arguing that the transaction lacked economic substance . the district court held that the transaction did not lack economic substance .