negotiations will be bilateral . the joint understanding does not specify a role for the united states in the negotiations , although one may emerge with time . president bush will not be playing a role similar to that of presidents carter and clinton in the past , and the united states will not necessarily make proposals in the event of a deadlock . this is in line with a long - standing administration view that it is the parties themselves who must make peace . however , it is anticipated that secretary of state rice will travel to the region frequently to provide encouragement and assistance . the resumption of negotiations after a seven - year hiatus is viewed as the main achievement of the conference , although the process may be said to have resumed with the olmert - abbas talks in mid - 2007 . in the joint understanding , the parties also commit to immediately implement their respective obligations under the road map . the united states will lead a tripartite u.s. - israeli - palestinian mechanism to follow up on implementation . the parties further commit to continue implementing the road map until they reach a peace treaty . unless otherwise agreed by the parties , implementation of the future peace treaty will be subject to the implementation of the road map , as judged by the united states . the united states will monitor and judge fulfillment of their road map commitments , a task that may prove to be extremely difficult . the president named general james l. jones ( ret .

 ) , former commander of u.s. european command , supreme allied commander europe , commandant of the marine corps , as special envoy for middle east security . the general will report to secretary rice , who said that jones will oversee "the full range of security issues for the israelis and palestinians as well as security cooperation with neighboring countries , and american efforts to provide assistance to the palestinian authority. he will not monitor compliance with the road map nor replace lt. gen. keith dayton , the u.s. middle east security coordinator , who has been assisting the palestinians with improving their security forces . the domestic political weaknesses of olmert and abbas may create challenges to or constraints on progress on the road map and a peace treaty and have prompted much skepticism about the prospects for the renewed peace process . the two sides are no more able to fulfill their obligations under phase i of the road map now than they have been for the past four and a half years and still disagree about implementation . phase i calls on israel to cease settlement activity . israel has more than 275,000 settlers in the west bank ( not including east jerusalem ) and , at annapolis , olmert referred to a letter that president bush gave to former israeli prime minister ariel sharon in april 2004 . in it , the president noted the need to take into account changed "realities on the ground , including already existing major israeli population centers," ( i.e.