they had to choose one or the other . subscribers who are receiving distant network signals because they cannot get a grade b signal may continue to receive distant network signals if their satellite tv provider was not offering local - into - local on january 1 , 2005 . if local - into - local becomes available after january 1 , 2005 , they will have to choose between distant network signals and local - into - local . subscribers to satellite television after the date of enactment of shvera ( december 8 , 2004 ) may receive distant network signals if they are eligible for them and local - into - local is not offered . if local - into - local later becomes available , they must subscribe to local - into - local . as noted above in the section " unserved households ," echostar communications , also known as the dish network , was charged with violating the satellite home viewer act in 1998 . echostar chose to defend its actions , and the company's distant network signals have been unaffected during the eight years the issue has been litigated . in may 2006 , an atlanta appeals court ordered a permanent injunction on echostar's carriage of all distant signals , including those provided to eligible consumers who cannot receive a grade b signal . in order to avoid a circumstance in which customers would lose access to distant signals they were eligible to receive , negotiations were undertaken between echostar and the four major broadcast networks ( abc , cbs , nbc , and fox ) to set the terms under which echostar could continue to carry those signals for eligible customers . a negotiated settlement was reached with three networks , but not with fox . echostar claims that fox chose not to negotiate a settlement because it is part of a vertically integrated company that is a partial owner of directv , which would stand to gain customers at the expense of echostar if echostar's eligible customers could no longer receive distant fox signals . fox , on the other hand , counters that it was involved in this litigation for five years before its parent company took operational control of directv , and having won the case in court , had no responsibility to negotiate a settlement that differed from the court's decision . on october 20 , 2006 , a florida district court upheld the injunction and voided the proposed settlement reached by abc , cbs , nbc , and echostar . the court set december 1 , 2006 , as the effective date of signal cutoff . seven pieces of legislation were introduced that would have lessened the impact of the injunction ( s. 4067 and h.r . 6384 ) , but none were passed before the december deadline . 108-447 ) in december 2004 . shvera was passed as division j of title ix of the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r . a number of changes were made to provisions affecting consumers who receive analog "distant network signals" and "local - into - local" network signals .