this is not the case . family members do not lose their status as victims by virtue of the possible appointment of a representative of the incapacitated or deceased victim . section 3771 applies to the victims harmed as a result of "the commission of a federal offense or an offense in the district of columbia. section 3771 should probably not be read to extend rights to the victims of the crimes proscribed in any of the territorial codes and the uniform code of military justice . section 3771 apparently does cover victims of juvenile delinquency with respect to misconduct that in the case of an adult offender would have been a violation of federal or dc law . section 3771 rights with respect to juvenile proceedings , however , may depend upon whether the juvenile proceedings are open or closed . moreover , the 2011 ag guidelines assert that federal juvenile delinquency provisions "restrict[] the type of information that may be disclosed to victims about investigations and proceedings regarding juvenile offenders unless the juvenile waives the restrictions or has been transferred for criminal prosecution as an adult. a corporation or other legal entity may incur criminal liability by virtue of the misconduct of a rogue officer or employee . thus , under some circumstances , the entity might be considered both an offender and a victim , but not here . a corporation may not claim restitution for losses it incurs as consequences of its executives' misconduct . section 3771 lists the right to be reasonably protected from the accused first among its victims' rights . the clause appears to have been the subject of little judicial construction . one court understood the term "accused" to mean that the right does not attach until a person has been "accused by criminal complaint , information or indictment. a second court observed that "[r]egardless of what this right might entail outside the bail context , it appears to add no new substance to the protection of crime victims afforded by the bail reform act , which already allows a court to order reasonable conditions of release or the detention of an accused defendant to 'assure ... the safety of any other person.' 3142 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) . notice allows victims to assert their rights , facilitates their participation , assures them that justice is being done , and affords them the opportunity to take protective measures when the accused is at large . section 3771 explicitly excuses a failure to notify victims of the release of an accused when to do so might be dangerous , and it permits the courts to seek reasonable accommodations when the number of victims in a given case precludes strict compliance with the section's demands . the notice clause has several distinctive features: ( 1 ) the notice rights apply only with respect to public court proceedings and parole proceedings ; ( 2 ) the rights attach to those proceedings involving the crime but not necessarily to all those related to the crime ; ( 3 ) victims are entitled to reasonable , accurate and timely notice ; and ( 4 ) victims are entitled to notice of the release or escape only of the accused .