chevron appealed the ruling in ecuador . chevron has long argued that the judgment was based on fraudulent evidence and that the legal system in ecuador will not provide a fair forum because ecuador's courts are politically influenced . some observers maintain that the chevron dispute demonstrates that ecuador has failed to meet atpa eligibility criteria pertaining to recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards . chevron corporation submitted documents to the united states trade representative in which it argues that ecuador is in violation of atpa eligibility criteria because the government of ecuador has failed to enforce or recognize arbitral awards under the u.s. - ecuador bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) . in 2006 , chevron filed a claim with the permanent court of arbitration in the hague to look into whether ecuador breached international law under the rules of the united nations ( u.n. ) commission on international trade law . in march 2010 , the u.n. arbitration panel ruled that the ecuadorian government violated the bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) with the united states with a series of unnecessary court delays in a long - running dispute between chevron and the government of ecuador . on august 31 , 2011 , the international tribunal in the hague ruled in chevron's favor with monetary compensation . on june 6 , 2013 , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia upheld the international arbitration award against ecuador . in a letter submitted to ustr in may 2013 , ambassador nathalie cely of ecuador states that the government of ecuador "has been and continues to be in compliance with the mandatory and discretionary eligibility criteria" of atpa . the letter urges the united states to extend trade preferences beyond the current expiration date of july 31 , 2013 . these petitions are included in ustr's 2012 annual product review for gsp . in june 2013 , the trade policy staff committee deferred the decision on ecuador's petitions to add additional products to the gsp program . if these products are added to the gsp program and congress extends gsp , the adverse effects from a termination of atpa may be mitigated . an issue of concern for policymakers has been related to ecuador's ability to meet the country eligibility criteria . one group of business associations contends that congress should , at a minimum , require periodic reviews of ecuador's fulfillment of atpa eligibility criteria . this would likely adversely affect long - term investment . any potential job losses would likely be statistically small on a national level ; however , they would likely be concentrated in certain regions of the country and could potentially come at a cost to some communities . for example , the flower industry in ecuador has been one of the key beneficiaries from atpa preferences . chevron claims that the environmental damage was caused by texaco and that the government of ecuador exempted the oil companies from liability in exchange for a cleanup and payment in the early 1990s . on february 9 , 2011 , an ecuadorean judge ordered chevron to pay $18.2 billion in cleanup costs for environmental damages in the amazon region .