it also held that the crown directors had breached their fiduciary duty . in evaluating the merits of the breach of fiduciary duty claim , the court noted that crown did not have a duty to use the fund's assets to the "beneficiaries' optimum benefit" and that a reversion , under certain circumstances , is acceptable . the pbgc then looks at the information to determine whether the criteria for a standard termination have been met . the court agreed with the lower court's findings that crown breached its fiduciary duty by failing to prioritize the participant's interests and also by failing to make an investigation of the plan's investment options . in reversing the decision of the lower court , the supreme court did not focus on whether crown's decision to purchase an annuity instead of merging the pension plans was a fiduciary decision . instead , the supreme court found that crown did not breach its fiduciary duty in failing to consider pace's merger proposal , because merger is not a permissible form of plan termination under erisa . in its decision , the supreme court looked at the language of section 4041 ( b ) ( 3 ) of erisa , under which plan assets must be distributed in a standard termination in the form of annuities , or by means that "in accordance with the provisions of the plan and any applicable regulations , otherwise fully provide all benefit liabilities under the plan. pace had argued that mergers could fall within this "otherwise" language , as the merger of assets into the multiemployer plan could fulfill plan benefit obligations . the court however , sided with the pbgc's interpretation of the section , that merger should be viewed as "an alternative to ( rather than an example of ) plan termination. the court also pointed out that congress had not expressly provided for merger as a means of plan termination . in support of its position , the court provided three ways in which erisa treats merger and termination differently . first , the court explained that if a plan terminates through the purchase of annuities , erisa ceases to apply to both the employer and the remaining plan assets . a merger on the other hand "represents a continuation , rather than a cessation of the erisa regime. the court pointed out that had the plans been merged into the larger multiemployer plan , that crown could still be subject to erisa's requirements if it employed plan participants . second , in a standard termination , erisa allows an employer to recover surplus amounts not necessary to pay plan liabilities . had crown merged the plan , it would not have been able to take back those assets , due to erisa's anti - inurement provision , which prohibits employers from obtaining a reversion "in the absence of termination. the court found that it was reasonable for the pbgc to refuse to recognize a termination mechanism that did not allow for the receipt of these funds , as authorized by law . third , the court pointed to the structure of erisa as evidence that merger was not to be included as a permissible means of termination .