russia is also a factor . turkmenistan and kazakhstan depend upon russia as a transit country for their pipeline shipments to the west , and could be subject to moscow's pressure to spurn nato proposals of assistance . political motives seem apparent in such policies . in 2003 , putin himself said that gazprom is a "powerful political and economic lever of influence over the rest of the world. in december 2007 , putin designated dimitri medvedev , the president of gazprom , as his successor as russian president , a move that could signal continuation of russia's aggressive energy policy . some u.s. officials believe that nato could play a role in building international political solidarity in the event of a deliberate disruption of energy flows . nato's military capability could be severely limited should russia or other suppliers cut european energy supplies in a crisis . to counter such a move , nato might coordinate policies among member states and with non - member partner governments to share resources and to bring an end to an energy disruption . nato might also provide security for infrastructure in energy - producing states facing unrest . iran has threatened to use its energy reserves to attain political objectives . in response to possible sanctions due to its refusal to comply with requirements by the international atomic energy agency on its nuclear program , iran has threatened to cut off or limit its energy supplies to buyers . beyond deliberate policies affecting energy security , there are many countries in central asia and the middle east that are unstable , have a need for new energy infrastructure investment , and have insecure transportation systems due to political unrest . some of these countries are in nato's partnership for peace program , or desire a closer association with nato . nato member states increasingly believe that the alliance must be a global player with global partners . this trend is evident in afghanistan , for example , where australia and new zealand are expending resources to bring stability through nato's international security assistance force , even though the two countries are not nato members . nato's role in energy security could be complementary to the eu's effort to strengthen market forces and interdependence in the international energy sector . u.s. officials agree with their eu counterparts that market forces can lead to greater energy security . diversification of supply , for example , through building more pipelines that are secure , is one course of action . turkey could play a major role , as key pipelines under discussion originating in the caspian region may cross its territory , thereby avoiding the russian energy grid . joint investment efforts to build such pipelines in and with energy producers such as kazakhstan and azerbaijan could be an important step in this direction . both countries are members of nato's partnership for peace program , and are seeking closer relations with the united states and its allies . development of more liquified natural gas ( lng ) transport and reception facilities from distant suppliers , such as nigeria , into europe could be another course of action .