i , ยง8 , cls . emergency work can include the clearance and removal of debris and wreckage and the restoration of essential public facilities and services , 42 u.s.c . ยง5170 ( c ) ( 6 ) ( b ) . the provision is designed for instances where communications problems impede the ability to meet the prerequisites for declaring an emergency or major disaster or the ability to coordinate the work through fema . unless the president determines that a disaster implicates preeminently federal interests , the declaration of an emergency under the stafford act requires that the governor of the affected state first make a determination that the situation is of such severity and magnitude that the state is unable to respond effectively without federal assistance , which determination must include a detailed definition of the type and amount of federal aid required , 42 u.s.c . the governor must also implement the state's emergency response plan , for example , by activating the state's national guard units under state control ( in which case the pca does not apply to them ) , and provide information regarding the resources that have been committed . the prerequisites for a major disaster declaration are similar to those for an emergency , 42 u.s.c . the governor must first execute the state's emergency plan and make a determination that state capabilities are insufficient to deal with the circumstances . however , the governor need not specify which forms of assistance are needed . the governor must provide information regarding the resources that have been committed and certify that the state will comply with cost sharing provisions under the stafford act . there is no provision for the declaration of a major disaster without the governor's request . if the governor activates guard units and keeps them under state control , those units are not restricted by the pca . if the state's national guard units are called into federal service to respond to an emergency or a major disaster , their role is restricted to the disaster relief operations authorized under the stafford act . dod doctrine allows commanders to provide resources and assistance to civil authorities without or prior to a declaration under the stafford act when a disaster overwhelms the capabilities of local authorities and necessitates immediate action "to save lives , prevent human suffering , or mitigate great property damage. immediate response actions can include the types of activities authorized under the stafford act , including , at the request of civil authorities , rescue , evacuation , and emergency medical treatment , restoration of essential public services , debris removal , controlling contaminated areas , safeguarding and distributing food and essential supplies , and supplying interim emergency communications . the controlling directive does not require a request from state or local officials , but states that "dod components shall not perform any function of civil government unless absolutely necessary on a temporary basis under conditions of immediate response . any commander who is directed , or undertakes , to perform such functions shall facilitate the reestablishment of civil responsibility at the earliest time possible. the immediate response authority is not provided for in any statute , but is said to have deep historical roots .