portions of the decision are unequivocal . the first sentence of the first section of the decision clearly prohibits the election of the chief executive by universal suffrage in 2012 , and the second sentence clearly prohibits the election of legco by universal suffrage in 2012 . the second sentence also prohibits altering the 50-50 split in the legco between members elected by geographic regions and members selected by functional constituencies in the 2012 election . other portions of the decision are more open to interpretation . regarding both the chief executive and legco elections of 2012 , the decision states that "appropriate amendments may be [emphasis added] made to the specific method" of selection . however , the original chinese — keyi zuo chu shidang xiugai — could be construed either as the npcsc granting hong kong permission to make appropriate amendments or that hong kong may propose appropriate amendments , without implying that the amendments would be necessarily accepted by the npcsc . similarly , regarding the chief executive election of 2017 and subsequent legco elections , the decision states it "may be implemented by the method of universal suffrage" [ keyi shixing you puxuan chansheng de banfa ] , but the language is subject to the same ambiguity of interpretation between the granting of permission or the statement of possibility . regardless of one's interpretation of these phrases , the decision does provide a clear statement of how election changes are to be made . amending the election process involves a six - step process . first , the chief executive "shall make a report" [ ti chu baogao ] to the npcsc on the need for amendment of hong kong's election process . second , the npcsc will make a determination [ queding ] on the issue of the need for amendment , but not on specific changes . third , the hong kong government shall introduce a bill of amendments to the legco . fourth , legco must pass the bill of amendments by at least a two - third majority . fifth , the chief executive must approve the bill passed by legco . sixth , the bill shall be reported to the npcsc for its approval [ pizhun ] when amending the election of the chief executive , and "for the record" [ beian ] , when amending the election of legco . the decision also is clear that a nominating committee [ timing weiyuanhui ] is also a required part of any process of selecting the chief executive , and that the nominating committee "may be formed with reference to" [ ke canzhao ] the election committee that currently selects the chief executive . on the day of the decision , tsang issued an official statement , saying "the hksar government and i welcome this decision , which has set a clear timetable for electing the chief executive and legislative council by universal suffrage. he also called on the people of hong kong to "treasure this hard - earned opportunity" and urged "everyone , with utmost sincerity , to bring an end to unnecessary contention , and to move towards reconciliation and consensus.