the credit expires at the end of 2010 . incentives existing prior to p.l . 109-58 include the electric vehicle tax credit ; the clean fuel vehicle tax deduction ; and tax deduction for the installation of alternative fuel infrastructure . the energy policy act of 2005 expanded and extended the existing tax incentives for nonconventional vehicles . these new incentives are similar to those proposed in the clean efficient automobiles resulting from advanced car technologies act ( clear act , s. 971 ) and the volume enhancing hardware incentives for consumer lowered expenses technology act ( vehicle technology act , h.r . 626 ) , as well as legislation discussed in the 108 th congress . among other provisions , sections 1341 and 1342 of the energy policy act of 2005 contain several tax incentives for alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles . for example , the act replaces the existing clean - fuel vehicle tax deduction with a new tax credit for hybrid vehicles ; creates a tax credit for the purchase of lean - burn passenger vehicles ; creates a new tax credit for the purchase of fuel - cell vehicles ; replaces the existing clean - fuel vehicle tax deduction with an alternative fuel vehicle tax credit ; and replaces the existing deduction for the installation of refueling infrastructure with a tax credit . each of these credits is discussed below ; table 4 summarizes each one . under the energy policy act of 2005 , the existing clean - fuel vehicle deduction for hybrid electric vehicles is replaced with a tax credit after 2005 . the amount of the credit is based on several factors . for passenger vehicles , these factors are the fuel economy increase and the expected lifetime fuel savings when compared with a conventional vehicle of comparable weight . to qualify for the credit , a hybrid vehicle must meet certain emissions standards and technical specifications . for heavy - duty vehicles ( more than 8,500 pounds ) , the credit is based on the fuel economy relative to a comparable vehicle , as well as the incremental cost of the hybrid vehicle above the cost of the conventional vehicle . the range of potential credits for each vehicle weight are shown in table 1 . the hybrid vehicle credit is scheduled to expire at the end of 2009 . the american council for an energy - efficient economy estimates that 2006 tax credits for hybrid passenger vehicles will range from $0 ( honda insight ) to $3,150 ( toyota prius ) . however , the irs has not yet announced the value of the credits for 2006 . the energy policy act of 2005 established a tax credit for the purchase of passenger vehicles with "lean - burn" engines . for the most part , diesel - powered vehicles that meet certain emissions and fuel economy standards would qualify for the tax credit , which is structured like the hybrid tax credit and ranges from $400 to $3,400 , based on fuel economy and fuel savings . the credit is scheduled to expire at the end of 2010 . however , no lean - burn passenger vehicles are available that meet the emission standard .