early elections are possible . poland's economy is among the most successful transition economies in east central europe ; all of the post - 1989 governments have generally supported free - market reforms . today the private sector accounts for over two - thirds of economic activity . in recent years , poland has enjoyed rapid economic development ; gdp grew by 3.4% in 2005 and 5.3% in 2006 , and is predicted to rise by 6.3% in 2007 . unemployment , though still high at 12.4% in july 2007 , is at its lowest level in several years . to keep a lid on the federal budget deficit , pis has been struggling with its coalition partners , who have sought additional funding for social programs . in the area of monetary policy , some analysts are concerned over pis's apparent willingness to reduce the independence of the country's central bank . leszek balcerowicz , the respected former governor of the bank , criticized the desire of some in government to push for a reduction in interest rates ; under his leadership , the bank geared its policies toward meeting the criteria for joining the euro , whereas pis and its allies reportedly wished to stimulate demand and growth through rate cuts . unlike several new eu members , the polish government has not yet set a firm target date for adopting the euro ; prime minister kaczynski stated that "it is very risky and that is why i think we can only consider it when the economy has significantly strengthened. warsaw reportedly asked brussels for additional time to bring down its deficit so that it may continue to receive eu assistance and eventually be able to qualify for euro adoption . in january 2007 , balcerowicz' term expired , and parliament approved slawomir skrzypek , a kaczynski ally with little experience in monetary policy , as the new central banker . in july 2007 , he announced the creation of an office to study the costs and benefits of joining the eurozone ; in the meantime , mr. skrzypek said , the central bank would remain neutral on the issue . despite its center - right label , pis has been characterized as having a somewhat statist approach toward governance , particularly in its economic policies . for example , it espouses that "national champions" in certain sectors be identified and nurtured . in addition , some have speculated that pis may seek to overturn earlier , sld - approved reforms that sought to introduce greater flexibility in the labor code . also , pis reportedly would like to introduce vertical integration of the parts of the energy sector that are still owned by the state . to reduce dependence upon russia , which supplies a large part of poland's gas and oil , the government has instituted talks with norway over laying a pipeline and constructing lng ( liquefied natural gas ) terminals on the baltic coast . in addition , poland and the baltic states are exploring a joint nuclear power project . over the past two years , poland has contributed a significant number of troops to the u.s. - led operation in iraq .