statute of limitations: 18 u.s.c . section 3292 and related matters : as a general rule , prosecution of federal crimes must begin within five years . federal capital offenses , certain federal sex offenses , and various violent federal terrorist offenses , however , may be prosecuted at any time . prosecution of nonviolent federal terrorism offenses must begin within eight years . moreover , the statute of limitations is suspended or tolled during any period in which the accused is a fugitive . whatever the applicable statute of limitations , section 3292 authorizes the federal courts to suspend it in order to await the arrival of evidence requested of a foreign government . extradition : extradition is perhaps the oldest form of international law enforcement assistance . it is a creature of treaty by which one country surrenders a fugitive to another for prosecution or service of sentence . the united states has bilateral extradition treaties with roughly two - thirds of the nations of the world . treaties negotiated before 1960 and still in effect reflect the view then held by the united states and other common law countries that criminal jurisdiction was territorial and consequently extradition could not be had for extraterritorial crimes . subsequently negotiated agreements either require extradition regardless of where the offense occurs , permit extradition regardless of where the offense occurs , or require extradition where the extraterritorial laws of the two nations are compatible . more recent extradition treaties address other traditional features of the nation's earlier agreements that complicate extradition , most notably the nationality exception , the political offense exception , and the practice of limiting extradition to a list of specifically designated offenses . as an alternative to extradition , particularly if the suspect is not a citizen of the country of refuge , foreign authorities may be willing to expel or deport him under circumstances that allow the united states to take him into custody . in the absence of a specific treaty provision , the fact that the defendant was abducted overseas and brought to the united states for trial rather than pursuant to a request under the applicable extradition treaty does not deprive the federal court of jurisdiction to try him . venue : federal crimes committed within the united states must be tried where they occur . crimes committed outside the united states are tried where congress has provided . congress has enacted both general and specific venue statutes governing extraterritorial offenses . section 3238 , the general provision , permits the trial of extraterritorial crimes either ( 1 ) in the district into which the offender is "first brought" or in which he is arrested for the offense ; or ( 2 ) prior to that time , by indictment or information in the district of the offender's last known residence , or if none is known , in the district of columbia . a related due process challenge is based on notice . it is akin to the concerns over secret laws and vague statutes , the exception to the maxim that ignorance of the law is no defense .