104-208 , division c ) . in addition to changing the terminology , iirira established tighter standards for obtaining this relief . there were two temporary legalization programs created by irca . and would the proposal include a mechanism for guest workers to obtain lpr status ? this report summarizes the main options for foreign nationals currently in the united states — legally or illegally — to become lprs . as discussed more fully below , most of these options would hinge on congress enacting special legislation . there are several main options for aliens in the united states to become lprs without leaving the country , and as figure 1 illustrates , most involving unauthorized aliens would require congress to enact a law . to adjust status under current law , aliens must be in the united states legally on a temporary visa and eligible for a lpr visa ; aliens fleeing persecution may be granted asylum ; or — in very limited circumstances — unauthorized aliens may become lprs through cancellation of removal by an immigration judge . even aliens in the united states legally on a temporary visa can only adjust to lpr status if they qualify under the statutory set of numerical limits and preference categories that give priority for admission on the basis of family relationships , needed skills , and geographic diversity . ina §245 permits an alien who is legally but temporarily in the united states to adjust to lpr status if the alien becomes eligible on the basis of a family relationship or job skills , without having to go abroad to obtain an immigrant visa . ina §245 was limited to aliens who were here legally until 1994 , when congress enacted a three - year trial provision ( commonly referred to as §245 ( i ) ) that allowed aliens here illegally to adjust status once they became eligible for an lpr visa , provided they paid a large penalty fee . in 2000 , congress temporarily reinstated §245 ( i ) through april 30 , 2001 ( p.l . over the years , congress has enacted statutes that enable certain aliens in the united states on a recognized — but non - permanent — basis to adjust their status to legal permanent residence when they are not otherwise eligible for an immigrant visa . since the codification of the ina in 1952 , there have been at least 16 acts of congress that have enabled certain aliens in the united states in some type of temporary legal status to adjust to lpr status . most of these adjustment of status laws focused on humanitarian cases , eg , aliens paroled into the united states by the attorney general or aliens from specific countries who were given blanket relief from removal such as temporary protected status ( tps ) , deferred enforced departure ( ded ) , or extended voluntary departure ( evd ) . the other major group of aliens adjusting status through special provisions involved nonimmigrants and typically were employment - based .