then the bubbles burst . as indicated in figure 1 , japan's nikkei stock market average had peaked in 1989 ( at 40,000 ) and dropped by 50% in one year and more than 78% ( to about 8,700 ) by the end of 2002 . japan's banks are allowed to hold equities as part of their capital base . when japan announced an early financial rescue package , it placed stringent conditions on the assistance that banks were unwilling to accept . the net result was that the banks ignored the package and tried to bolster their balance sheets by not lending . this was seen as worsening the economic conditions for the country . most of the assistance to failing institutions , however , carried conditions that were enforced by the dicj . new technologies , globalization , and the blurring of boundaries between types of financial products and institutions made risk management increasingly difficult for financial regulators . the bursting of the real estate bubble in japan caused more difficulty for banks than the bursting of the bubble in stocks because the decline in real estate values affected the value of collateral on much bank lending . japan is considered to have acted too slowly with respect to monetary policy , fiscal policy , and the resolution of problems in the banking sector . once the economy began to recover , fiscal policy is thought to have tightened too soon . the value of the unrealized capital gains on such stock holdings dropped from $355 billion in 1989 to about $40 billion in 2002 . this drastically reduced key capital reserves for many banks . also , by 2000 , commercial land values in the six major metropolitan areas had fallen by 80% from their peak level in 1991 . residential and industrial land values also had fallen by nearly 20% . the bursting of this economic bubble caused the value of collateral underlying many bank loans to drop below the value of their loan principal . also , commercial real estate ventures , especially office buildings , became unprofitable as rents fell . what began as a financial and banking crisis soon caused the overall japanese economy to slow . as the economy stagnated , companies faced excess capacity , excess inventories , and lower profits . also as more and more loans turned sour , more and more of the underlying real estate had to be sold at "bargain" prices . in 1995 , japan's banks reported $280 billion in non - performing loans , but this figure turned out to be vastly understated . unlike the situation in the united states under the current global economic crisis , japanese financial institutions tended not to bundle and repackage their loans as collateralized debt obligations or rely as extensively on derivatives and credit default swaps . mortgage defaults in japan also tended to be on commercial property , not on private residences . the country also had no subprime or alternate - a loans , but lending in japan , particularly commercial lending , often was relational ( based on connections and relations ) rather than being purely market based .