there are concerns that the 25-mile over the horizon operating capability may no longer provide the protection to the fleet that it once did . one example of such lack of protection is the 2006 hezbollah c - 802 cruise missile attack against an israeli ship where two missiles were fired , with one hitting the israeli warship , which was about 10 miles from shore , and the second missile striking an egyptian ship 36 miles from shore . concerns also have been raised that , when ashore , the flat - bottomed efv may be excessively vulnerable to improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) . congress might decide to evaluate general dynamics' proposal to build 200 efvs instead of 573 . one evaluation criteria could be the efv's overall performance in operational testing , which is in its final stages . while general dynamics claims that current testing is reportedly "exceeding requirements by 90 percent," the marines have not yet issued their final test results . another issue for consideration is if the technologically advanced efv now fits in with the marines' planned restructuring to what it describes as a "middle weight force" with less equipment that it currently possesses . while general dynamics is promoting a 200 efv procurement , it is likely that if this course of action is chosen , that they would then advocate for the acquisition of additional efvs over time , perhaps approaching the 500 plus or even 1,000 vehicle requirements of the past . if the efv program is terminated as secretary gates intends , there could likely be two decades - worth of knowledge and associated technologies , which could be a major benefit — as well as potential cost savings — for the aav upgrade and acv programs . while it is reasonable to assume that the marines would make good use of work previously done on the efv , congress might consider examining what efv technologies the marines plan to migrate to the acv . this examination could help to ensure that there is "value added" by these technologies and that they meet "cost - benefit" criteria — in other words , these technologies meet acv key performance parameters ( kpps ) and are not expensive "nice to have" features that could potentially drive up the acv per unit cost . congress might wish to review whether the marines' plan to field the acv in four years is overly ambitious . during the navy's presentation of its fy2012 budget request , it was reported that navy and pentagon officials stated that the "soonest that the acv would be ready was 2024. . originally , general amos had reportedly wanted the gcv to be fielded using an acquisition track similar to the mine - resistant ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicle , which was fielded in a matter of months as opposed to years . as previously noted , the commandant of the marine corps , general james amos , has committed the marine corps to fielding the acv within four years . it is not known if this four - year requirement is based on a specific operational need or if it is driven by other factors .