teleflex appealed the decision to the federal circuit . the appellate court vacated the district court's ruling , after finding that the district court had made errors in its obviousness determination . specifically , the federal circuit noted that the district court had improperly applied the tsm test by not adhering to it more strictly — the district court had reached its obviousness ruling "without making findings as to the specific understanding or principle within the knowledge of a skilled artisan that would have motivated one with no knowledge of [the] invention to make the combination in the manner claimed. the federal circuit explained that district courts are "required" to make such specific findings pursuant to federal circuit case law establishing the tsm standard . in regard to the patent in the case , the appellate court found that the prior art in adjustable pedal design had been focused on solving the "constant ratio problem" ( described as when "the force required to depress the pedal remains constant irrespective of the position of the pedal on the assembly" ) ; whereas the motivation behind the patented invention licensed to teleflex was "to design a smaller , less complex , and less expensive electronic pedal assembly. in the federal circuit's view , unless the "prior art references address the precise problem that the patentee was trying to solve," the problem would not motivate a person of ordinary skill in the art to combine the prior art teachings — here , the placement of an electronic sensor on an adjustable pedal . the supreme court granted certiorari on june 26 , 2006 , to review the ksr case , in which the central question before the court was whether the federal circuit had erred in crafting tsm as the sole test for obviousness under § 103 ( a ) of the patent act . on april 30 , 2007 , the court unanimously reversed the federal circuit's judgment , holding that the tsm test for obviousness was incompatible with § 103 and supreme court precedents . associate justice anthony kennedy , delivering the opinion of the court , explained that the proper framework for a court or patent examiner to employ when determining an invention's obviousness is that set forth in the court's 1966 opinion graham v. john deere co. of kansas city . ksr international co. also manufactures an adjustable pedal assembly . initially , ksr supplied aps for cars with engines that use cable - actuated throttle controls ; thus , the aps that ksr manufactured included cable - attachment arms . in mid - 2000 , ksr designed its aps to incorporate an electronic pedal position sensor in order for it to work with electronically controlled engines , which are being increasingly used in automobiles . in 2002 , teleflex filed a patent infringement lawsuit against ksr after ksr had refused to enter into a royalty arrangement , asserting that this new design came within the scope of its patent claims .