she called on prosecutors to drop charges against imedi . 110-17 ) urged nato to extend a membership action plan for georgia and designated georgia as eligible to receive security assistance under the program established by the nato participation act of 1994 ( p.l . indicating ongoing interest in georgia's reform progress , on december 13 , 2007 , the senate approved s. res . 391 , which urged the u.s. president to publically back free and fair elections in georgia . in introducing the resolution , senator richard lugar averred that he was "a strong friend of the georgian people," and that the resolution indicated "our strong hopes that ... georgia will return to the democratic path and embrace a free and fair election process. he also urged georgia to facilitate the work of international election monitors , particularly those from the osce . representative alcee hastings was appointed as special coordinator by the osce chairman - in - office to lead a mission of nearly 500 short - term observers who monitored the january 5 election . the day after the election , representative hastings reportedly stated that he viewed the election as a "viable expression of free choice of the georgian people," but he also cautioned that georgia's "future holds immense challenges" because of the high degree of mistrust and polarization in georgian society . it renewed broadcasts on december 12 , and became for a time the main television outlet for opposition candidates in the election ( see also below ) . significant amendments to the electoral code were adopted in late november and mid - december to make elections more democratic , including by adding some opposition party representatives to electoral commissions . however , the adoption of new rules shortly before the election sometimes resulted in haphazard implementation , according to the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) , which monitored the electoral process . most observers considered the nomination process for presidential candidates to be inclusive and transparent . besides saakashvili , six other candidates were successfully registered ( see table 1 ) . among the campaign pledges made by the candidates , saakashvili ran on his claimed record of reducing corruption and crime and improving living conditions , and pledged to further reduce poverty and to restore georgia's territorial integrity peacefully . levan gachechiladze stated that he would work to create a parliamentary system of rule with a constitutional monarchy , nominate former foreign minister salome zourabichvili as the prime minister , and encourage private enterprise and poverty alleviation . davit gamqrelidze pledged to consider backing either a parliamentary system or constitutional monarchy , and to bolster freedom of speech , personal property rights , and an independent judiciary . shalva natelashvili pledged to boost social services and called for a parliamentary system . the harvard - educated giorgi maisashvili stressed business creation . all the candidates except irina sarishvili - chanturia and prominent businessman badri patarkatsishvili called for georgia to seek membership in nato . sarishvili - chanturia urged voters to either vote for her or other candidates she favored . patarkatsishvili called for abolishing the presidency , creating a confederation with a weak central government , and establishing close ties with russia .