in december 2005 , the house passed h.r . the thorniest of these immigration issues remains the treatment of unauthorized aliens in the united states . future debates will reflect the divergent views on how to address the more than 12 million illegal alien population , as well as what the level of future permanent immigration should be . the house judiciary subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law held multiple hearings weekly in april , may , and june on various aspects of comprehensive immigration reform . the policy issues for congress are twofold: whether and how to reform the nation's legal immigration system ; and whether border security and interior enforcement provisions — as well as the resources of the immigration agencies charged with the administration and enforcement of immigration laws — are sufficient to implement comprehensive immigration reform . immigration enforcement encompasses an array of legal tools , policies , and practices to prevent and investigate violations of immigration laws . the spectrum of enforcement issues ranges from visa policy at consular posts abroad and border security along the country's perimeter , to the apprehension , detention , and removal of unauthorized aliens in the interior of the country . illustrative among these issues likely to arise in the 110 th congress are border security , worksite enforcement , alien smuggling , and the role of state and local law enforcement . the challenge inherent in this policy issue is balancing employers' hopes to increase the supply of legally present foreign workers , families' longing to reunite and live together , and a widely - shared wish among the stakeholders to improve the policies governing legal immigration into the country . the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states ( 37 million ) is at the highest level in our history and has reached a proportion of the u.s. population ( 12.4% ) not seen since the early 20 th century . of the foreign - born residents in the united states , approximately one - third are naturalized citizens , one - third are legal permanent residents , and one - third are unauthorized ( illegal ) residents . there is a broad - based consensus that the u.s. immigration system , based upon the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , is broken . this consensus erodes , however , as soon as the options to reform the u.s. immigration system are debated . the 110 th congress is faced with a strategic question of whether to continue to build on incremental reforms of specific elements of immigration ( eg , border security , employment verification , temporary workers , or alien children ) or whether to comprehensively reform the ina . while it appears that bipartisan as well as bicameral agreement on specific revisions to the ina may be achievable , it is also clear that many think a comprehensive overhaul of the ina is overdue and necessary .