a joint chad - u.n . working group is expected to monitor the situation on the ground and assess progress by the government of chad on several additional benchmarks related to civilian protection , including voluntary return and resettlement of idps , demilitarization of the camps , and improved domestic law enforcement capacity . resolution 1923 commits minurcat to reducing its military component to 2,200 personnel by july 15 , 2010 , and to commence the withdrawal of remaining troops on october 15 , to be completed by december 31 , 2010 . until the force begins its final withdrawal in october , minurcat retains authorization to provide security for u.n. personnel , facilities and equipment and to , when necessary , conduct medical evacuations of u.n. personnel or extractions of u.n. personnel and humanitarian staff in danger . the resolution does permit minurcat , "acting within its means and capabilities and where possible in consultation with the government of chad," to "respond to imminent threats of violence to civilians in the immediate vicinity. some humanitarian officials have expressed concern that the withdrawal of the u.n. force could create a "security vacuum" in the east . presidential elections are anticipated in april 2011 . the political dialogue between the government and the opposition has been strained , particularly following the february 2008 arrest of several opposition and civic leaders . seven months later , in september , a commission of inquiry officially concluded that one of those arrested , ibni oumar mahamat saleh , a respected former minister who was the spokesman of the opposition coalition , coordination des partis politiques pour la défense de la constitution ( cpdc ) , had died in custody . european donors nevertheless have continued to support the 2007 political accord and are expected to provide technical support for the upcoming elections . after déby's appointment of a new prime minister in april 2008 and the subsequent appointment of four former political opponents to high - level cabinet positions , some observers suggested that the president might be moving toward more inclusive governance . others viewed the appointments as an attempt to divide the opposition , which , with over 100 political parties , remains weak and fragmented . déby appointed another prime minister in march 2010 after the previous office holder resigned amid allegations of corruption . he also appointed 18 new ministers , including nine women . some opponents of president déby have used his perceived lack of democratic legitimacy to foment armed efforts to oust the long - serving chadian leader . déby has faced several coup attempts , and diverse armed political and regional factions have been active since the 1990s . shifting rebel alliances , which include defectors from the government , gained strength in the east in 2005-2006 and launched a series of raids on strategic government positions . inter - communal violence not directly related to the rebellion also increased . rebels attacked the capital , n'djamena , in april 2006 , and déby declared a state of emergency in november of that year . years of authoritarian rule and civil war followed .