actual knowledge of an emergency medical condition is required . therefore , if a hospital fails to accurately detect an individual's emergency condition and discharges that individual without stabilizing the medical condition , the hospital may not have violated emtala's stabilization provisions . however , the hospital may still be civilly liable to the individual based upon state medical malpractice claims if the failure to detect an emergency condition was due to negligence during the screening exam . in support of this argument , the defendants noted that , during consideration of emtala , the house judiciary committee had issued a report stating [the civil suit provision of emtala] authorizes only two types of actions for damages . the first of these could be brought by the individual patient who suffers harm as a direct result of [a] hospital's failure to appropriately screen , stabilize , or properly transfer that patient . the second type of action could be brought by a medical facility which received an improperly transferred emergency patient . emtala provides a civil remedy to "any individual who suffers personal harm as a direct result of a participating hospital's violation. in 2009 , the sixth circuit held that this language provided a civil remedy to third parties that were injured as a direct result of a violation of either the screening or stabilization requirements . in the case before the court , the hospital was alleged to have improperly discharged an emergency room patient who was psychiatrically unstable . ten days after his discharge the patient murdered his wife . the wife's estate subsequently brought suit against the hospital alleging that the hospital's failure to stabilize before discharge was a direct cause of her death . the defendants argued that the patient's wife lacked standing under emtala because it only permitted civil claims by persons that were personally denied treatment in violation of the statute . because third parties were not mentioned in the legislative history , the defendants argued that this suit should not be permitted . the sixth circuit disagreed , noting that where a house committee's explanation of the meaning of a statute seems to differ from the statute's actual wording , this court should not rely on that committee's statement as the exclusive explanation for the meaning of the statute.... we recognize that our interpretation of the civil enforcement provision may have consequences for hospitals that congress may or may not have considered or intended . however , our duty is only to read the statute as it is written . in the court's view , the statutory text afforded a civil remedy to " any individual who suffers personal harm as a direct result" of the hospital's actions , and the most logical reading of this text permits suits to be brought by harmed third parties . hospitals that do not have a "dedicated emergency department" are not subject to the screening requirement of emtala . similarly , emergency care providers that are unaffiliated with a hospital need not comply with emtala , even where those providers are the only medical care facilities reasonably accessible . for example , in rodriguez v. american int'l ins .