and its reauthorization in 2008 ( h.r . 110 - 346 ) serve as the most prominent examples of legislative action on these issues . the legislation both reinforced some aspects of the bush administration's rhetoric on north korea and expresses dissatisfaction with other elements of its policy on north korea . the reauthorization bill explicitly criticizes the implementation of the original law and reasserts congressional interest in adopting human rights as a major priority in u.s. policy toward north korea . u.s. attention to north korean human rights and refugees is complicated by the geopolitical sensitivities of east asia . china is wary of u.s. involvement in the issue and chafes at any criticism based on human rights . south korea also had reservations about a more active u.s. role , particularly in terms of refugees , although the current lee administration in seoul has been more amenable to such efforts . both want to avoid a massive outflow of refugees , which they believe could trigger instability or the collapse of north korea . u.s. executive branch officials worry that criticism of how seoul and beijing approach north korea's human rights violations could disrupt the multilateral negotiations to deal with pyongyang's nuclear weapons programs . north korean refugees seeking resettlement often transit through other asian countries , raising diplomatic , refugee , and security concerns for those governments . in the first several years of the bush administration , high - level officials , including the president and secretary of state , publicly and forcefully criticized the regime in pyongyang for its human rights practices . as efforts to push forward the six - party talks accelerated in 2007 , the administration did not propose any negotiations with north korea over human rights but asserted that human rights is one of several issues to be settled with north korea after the nuclear issue is resolved . the six - party agreement of february 13 , 2007 , calls for the united states and north korea to "start bilateral talks aimed at resolving bilateral issues and moving toward full diplomatic relations. prior to the agreement in 2007 , the bush administration held that it would not agree to normalization of diplomatic relations with north korea until there was progress on human rights ( presumably including refugees ) and other issues . however , after the signing of the agreement in february 2007 , some observers say that former assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs christopher hill focused exclusively on a satisfactory settlement of the nuclear issue . the 108 th congress passed by voice vote , and president bush signed , the north korean human rights act of 2004 ( nkhra ) . the legislation authorized up to $20 million for each of the fiscal years 2005-2008 for assistance to north korean refugees , $2 million for promoting human rights and democracy in north korea and $2 million to promote freedom of information inside north korea ; asserted that north koreans are eligible for u.s. refugee status and instructs the state department to facilitate the submission of applications by north koreans seeking protection as refugees ; and required the president to appoint a special envoy to promote human rights in north korea .