these proposals included h.r . 1606 ( hensarling ) , the online freedom of speech act , which was considered by the house under suspension of the rules but , on a 225-182 vote , failed to receive the two - thirds necessary for passage . the bill was brought up again and ordered reported favorably by the house administration committee on march 9 , 2006 , setting up consideration by the house , but the vote was postponed pending fec regulatory action . also during the 109 th congress , in response to concerns that the online freedom of speech act could open the door to feca circumvention ( for example , by allowing corporations and unions to finance advertisements ) , two additional bills were offered: h.r . 4194 ( shays - meehan ) would have excluded internet communications from feca regulation , but regulated communications placed on a website for a fee and those made by most corporations and unions , by any political committee , and by state and local parties ; and h.r . 4900 ( allen - bass ) would have exempted from feca regulation most individual online communications and advertisements below a dollar threshold . in the wake of the new fec regulations approved on march 27 , 2006 , however , house floor action was postponed indefinitely . during the 110 th congress , the regulation of political communications on the internet was not the subject of major legislative action . 894 ( price , nc ) would have extended "stand by your ad" disclaimer requirements to internet communications , among others . it was referred to the committee on house administration . 5699 ( hensarling ) would have exempted from treatment as a contribution or expenditure any uncompensated internet services by individuals and corporations that are wholly owned by individuals engaging primarily in internet activities , which do not derive a substantial portion of revenue from sources other than income from internet activities , except payment for ( 1 ) a public communication ( other than a nominal fee ) , ( 2 ) the purchase or rental of an email address list made at the direction of a political committee , or ( 3 ) an email address list that is transferred to a political committee . 5699 also would have exempted blogs and other internet and electronic publications from treatment as an expenditure by including such communications in the general media exemption applicable to broadcast stations and newspapers . it was referred to the committee on house administration . similar legislation has not yet been introduced in the 111 th congress . 417 ( shays - meehan ) in the 106 th congress . an amendment was offered to that bill by representative delay to exempt communications over the internet from regulation under feca , but was defeated by a vote of 160-268 . during the 109 th congress , several bills were proposed to exempt all communications over the internet from the bcra definition of "public communication," and therefore , regulation under feca .