in the 2002 farm bill ( p.l . 107-171 ) congress authorized $5.5 billion ( in export value , not cost to the treasury ) for such guarantees , plus an additional $1 billion to be made available to countries that are emerging markets . four ccc export credit guarantee programs were authorized in the 2002 farm bill . gsm - 102 guaranteed short - term ( up to 3 years ) financing of u.s. farm products ; gsm - 103 guaranteed longer - term ( 3-10 years ) financing . the supplier credit guarantee program ( scgp ) guaranteed very short - term ( up to 1 year ) financing of exports . the facilities financing guarantee program ( ffgp ) guaranteed financing of goods and services exported from the united states to improve or establish agriculture - related facilities in emerging markets . the amount of gsm - 102 credit that ccc must make available each year is set at not less than $5.5 billion , but the $40 million credit subsidy cap , according to the manager's statement accompanying the bill , is expected to finance $4 billion annually in export credit guarantees . the 2008 farm bill extends authority for the ffgp to fy2012 . it also provides that the secretary of agriculture may waive requirements that u.s. goods be used in the construction of a facility under this program , if such goods are not available or their use is not practicable . the new law also permits the secretary to provide a guarantee for this program for the term of the depreciation schedule for the facility , not to exceed 20 years . the new farm bill caps the credit subsidy for the program at $40 million annually . the 2002 farm bill authorized four programs to promote u.s. agricultural products in overseas markets , including the market access program ( map ) , the foreign market development program ( fmdp ) , the emerging markets program ( emp ) , and the technical assistance for specialty crops program ( tasc ) . authorization of ccc funds for the market development programs expired with the 2002 farm bill in 2007 . during the farm bill debate both the administration and producers of fruits and vegetables advocated increased funding for export market development programs , targeted to specialty crops ( fruits and vegetables ) . the 2002 farm bill authorized direct export subsidies of agricultural products through the export enhancement program ( eep ) and the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) . both programs subsidized agricultural exports when u.s. domestic prices were higher than world or international prices . eep , which mainly subsidized exports of wheat and wheat flour ( around 80% of eep subsidies ) , has been little used as u.s. and world prices have moved closer together . the last year of significant eep subsidies was 1995 ; there were no eep subsidies during the five years of the 2002 farm bill . deip provided subsidies for dairy product exports ; no deip subsidies have been provided since 2005 . agricultural export subsidies are a major issue in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , where preliminary agreement has been reached to eliminate them by 2013 .