some may have been produced or modified indigenously . a similar report was issued in 2001 . this assessment is often interpreted that iran will have icbms by 2015 , but the unclassified intelligence statements place various caveats on that potential capability . these intelligence statements serve as the official u.s. basis for assessing the iranian icbm threat to the united states and its friends and allies . these assessments drive u.s. military efforts designed to respond to such threats , such as the u.s . ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) program in general and the u.s. proposed missile defense system in europe specifically , as well as u.s. diplomatic efforts to curb iranian long - range ballistic missile programs . these assessments , in conjunction with official u.s. assessments of iranian nuclear weapons development , contribute significantly to ongoing u.s. concerns over iranian threats to u.s. and international security . these assessments do not mean , however , that there is universal agreement within the u.s. intelligence community on the issue of an iranian icbm . according to these unclassified statements , some argue that an iranian icbm test is likely before 2010 , and very likely before 2015 . other u.s. officials believe , however , that there is "less than an even chance" for such a test before 2015 . furthermore , u.s. assessments are also conditional in that an iranian icbm capability would have to rely on access to foreign technology , from , for example , north korea or russia . finally , it is argued that an iranian icbm could develop from an iranian space program under which a space - launch vehicle program might be converted into an icbm program . some have argued that iran could develop and test such a space launch vehicle by 2010 . some observers argue that although the u.s. position may be based upon a realistic assessment , it is also a worst - case analysis of the potential threat from iran . they argue that "with rare exception this level of threat has rarely turned out to be the historical reality. beyond these general u.s. public statements about iranian icbm developments , there are few unclassified details . further , non - official public sources reflect little technical or program consensus regarding an iranian icbm program . some have referred to a program called the shahab - 6 ( or kosar in some instances ) as a potential icbm development program , perhaps derived from north korean or russian missile technology , or both . although iran continues to declare it has no plans to develop an icbm program , there appears to be considerable public uncertainty and debate as to whether the shahab - 6 is an actual design study concept , or an active or abandoned iranian icbm or even space - launch program . in january 2004 , iran's defense minister reportedly announced that iran would launch a satellite within 18 months . iran then launched its first commercial satellite on a russian rocket in 2005 , and announced that it had allocated $500 million for space projects over the next five years . in february 2008 , iran reportedly launched a low - orbit research rocket in preparation for a later satellite launch .