this report will be updated . in february 2003 , the administration requested $100 million in fy2004 appropriations for activities to ensure an adequate supply of vaccine in the event of a pandemic . 108-199 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 , congress provided $50 million to hhs to enhance vaccine production capacity . the law was not accompanied by a conference report . except for amounts specified — including an amount for pandemic flu — the law provided that departments be funded through fy2007 at the fy2006 level , with certain rescissions and salary adjustments . 110-5 explicitly provided $100 million to the phssef , to be transferred to cdc , for preparedness and response to pandemic flu and other emerging infectious diseases . it also rescinded $29.7 million from cdc regular appropriations for fy2006 , intended for the purchase of annual bulk monovalent influenza vaccine ( to bolster supplies of seasonal flu vaccine ) . it did not mention any additional hhs amounts for flu preparedness . funding was used in part to award a $10 million contract to a domestic manufacturer of injectable flu vaccine to assure a year - round supply of eggs for vaccine production . in february 2004 , the administration requested $100 million in fy2005 appropriations , again for hhs to expand vaccine production capacity . in october 2004 , while congress was considering fy2005 appropriations , there was a production failure at a plant supplying half of the nation's supply of injectable seasonal flu vaccine . this resulted in a nationwide shortage , and focused attention on the frailty of the vaccine production system . at the same time , h5n1 avian flu was spreading through asia . in december 2004 , congress passed p.l . 108-447 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2005 , providing hhs with the requested $100 million to bolster flu vaccine production capacity , including the purchase of flu vaccine . it has since spread to europe and africa . the virus has infected more than 330 people , killing more than half of them . health officials are concerned that it could change sufficiently to cause a global human pandemic . beginning in fy2004 , congress has provided funding specifically for pandemic flu preparedness , through both regular and emergency supplemental appropriations . this report describes federal funding for pandemic flu , primarily to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . federal funding to control the disease in birds is generally provided to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) for activities involving commercial poultry , and to the department of the interior for activities involving wildlife . the departments of homeland security , defense , state , and veterans affairs , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , have also received funds for global avian flu control . it is difficult to track federal funding for flu preparedness , for several reasons . first , funds designated specifically for pandemic flu do not reflect the sum of all relevant activities . for example , programs to improve health surveillance in general , or to streamline federal disaster response , are important for pandemic preparedness .