implementation of most of these accords has lagged . a technical protocol on ibm went into effect at the end of 2012 , with the opening of several joint kosovo / serbia border / boundary posts . the two sides also agreed to exchange liaison personnel ( to be located in eu offices in belgrade and pristina ) to monitor the implementation of agreements and address any problems that may arise . since 2008 , serbia's foreign policy has focused on two main objectives — integration into the european union and hindering international recognition of the independence of serbia's former kosovo province by legal and diplomatic means . to this end , serbia has focused on seeking good relations with the eu , in order to achieve its long - term goal of eu membership . it has tried to avoid conflicts with the 22 eu countries that have recognized kosovo's independence , while cultivating the five states whose non - recognition of kosovo serves to block a closer formal relationship between the eu and kosovo . serbia has also bolstered ties with russia and china , partly in an effort to secure loans , investment , and other economic advantages and partly to ensure they maintain their opposition to kosovo's independence . u.s. - serbian ties have improved since u.s. recognition of kosovo's independence in february 2008 , but appear not to play a central role in either country's foreign policy at present . although the united states has offered to "agree to disagree" with serbia over kosovo , the issue may continue to affect relations , particularly as the united states remains kosovo's most powerful international supporter . serbia has played a key role in u.s. policy toward the balkans since the collapse of the former yugoslavia in 1991 . u.s. officials came to see the milosevic regime as a key factor behind the wars in the region in the 1990s , and pushed successfully for u.n. economic sanctions against serbia . on the other hand , the united states drew milosevic into the negotiations that ended the war in bosnia in 1995 . the united states bombed serbia in 1999 to force belgrade to relinquish control of kosovo , where serbian forces had committed atrocities while attempting to suppress a revolt by ethnic albanian guerrillas . u.s. officials hailed the success of serbian democrats in defeating the milosevic regime in elections in 2000 and 2001 . the united states has seen a democratic and prosperous serbia , at peace with its neighbors and integrated into euro - atlantic institutions , as an important part of its key policy goal of a europe "whole , free , and at peace. u.s. aid to serbia has declined sharply in recent years , perhaps reflecting overall u.s. budgetary stringency , changing u.s. global priorities , and serbia's eu membership candidacy , which is expected to result in greater eu aid to the country . in fy2011 , serbia received $45 million in u.s. aid for political and economic reforms , $1.896 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) , $0.9 million in imet military training funds , and $1.15 million in nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining and related ( nadr ) aid .