ed also has the authority to conduct periodic compliance reviews . according to the national association for single sex public education , there are currently at least 514 public schools in the united states that offer single - sex education in the form of single - sex schools or classrooms . as noted above , the enactment of the new regulations raises questions regarding whether ed has the statutory authority under title ix to authorize single - sex classrooms and whether the regulations comply with the statutory requirements of the eeoa . as noted above , the 2006 title ix regulations may raise constitutional issues for public schools that offer single - sex classes . under the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment , which prohibits the government from denying to any individual the equal protection of the law , governmental classifications that are based on sex receive heightened scrutiny from the courts . laws that rely on sex - based classifications will survive such scrutiny only if they are substantially related to achieving an important government objective . currently , there are only two supreme court cases that address the equal protection implications of sex - segregated schools . although both of these cases occurred in a higher education setting , they provide some guidance that may be applicable to the elementary and secondary education context . in the earlier case , mississippi university for women v. hogan , the court held that the exclusion of an individual from a publicly funded school because of his or her sex violates the equal protection clause unless the government can show that the sex - based classification serves important governmental objectives and that the discriminatory means employed are substantially related to the achievement of those objectives . because the court found that the state had not met this burden , it struck down mississippi's policy of excluding men from its state - supported nursing school for women . the court's most recent constitutional pronouncement with respect to sex discrimination in education occurred in united states v. virginia . in that case , the court held that the exclusion of women from the virginia military institute ( vmi ) , a public institution of higher education designed to prepare men for military and civilian leadership , was unconstitutional , despite the fact that the state had created a parallel school for women . although the court reiterated that sex - based classifications must be substantially related to an important government interest , the court also appeared to conduct a more searching form of inquiry by requiring the state to establish an "exceedingly persuasive justification" for its actions . according to the court , this justification must be genuine and must not rely on overbroad generalizations about the talents , capacities , or preferences of men and women . in applying this standard , the court rejected the two arguments that virginia advanced in support of vmi's exclusion of women , namely , that the single - sex education offered by vmi contributed to a diversity of educational approaches in virginia and that vmi employed a unique method of training that would be destroyed if women were admitted .