section 302 of p.l . 110-177 amends sections 515 and 516 to permit 10% of the funds appropriated for grants under those sections to be available for grants to improve security for state , territorial , or tribal court systems with priority to be given to those demonstrating the greatest need . to accommodate the new allotment , the percentage of appropriations available for corrections alternatives would be reduced from 80% to 70% of the funds appropriated . appropriations were last authorized for fy2000 . section 301 of p.l . 110-177 amends part h to include state witness protection programs and authorizes appropriations for part h of $20 million for each fiscal year through 2011 . sections 515 and 516 of title i of the omnibus crime and safe streets act of 1968 authorizes discretionary bureau of justice assistance correctional options grants . section 2501 of title i authorizes a matching grant program to purchase armored vests for state , territorial and tribal law enforcement officers . section 302 also amends section 2501 of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act to include matching grants for the purchase of armored vests for state and territorial court officers . section 302 further allows the attorney general to require that state , territorial or tribal applicants for grants under programs administered by the department of justice show that they have considered the security needs of their judicial branch following consultation with judicial and law enforcement authorities . the united states sentencing commission was established in 1984 as an independent entity located within the judicial branch . its purpose is to promulgate sentencing guidelines for use by federal courts in criminal cases . those guidelines , once binding upon the courts , are now simply advisory , although the courts must continue to consider them and the guidelines continue to carry considerable persuasive force . the commission may enter into contracts in fulfillment of its responsibilities . as a general rule , appropriated funds are available for obligation under contract or otherwise only during the fiscal year for which they were appropriated . there are several exceptions to the general rule . for example , the heads of executive agencies may contract for services that begin in one fiscal year and end in the next . they may also enter into multi - year contracts . and with sufficient security , they may make advance payments on contract obligations to be fulfilled at a later date . in the judicial branch , the administrative office of the united states courts enjoys similar authority . section 501 of p.l . 110-177 temporarily grants the sentencing commission comparable authority . section 502 of p.l . 110-177 eases the burdens of life insurance costs for magistrate judges . the chief judges of the various united states courts of appeal or the various circuit judicial councils may designate and assign senior judges to perform judicial duties within the circuit . as a general matter , senior judges who are designated and assigned enjoy all of the powers of the court , circuit or district to which they are assigned , except for the power to appoint any person to a statutory position . federal statutes describe the appointment authority for several positions in the judicial branch .