ineffectiveness . some argue that increased collaboration will not produce tangible benefits for the united states , especially without a new bilateral political climate . the potential benefits of expanded cooperation and dialogue with china include: improved transparency . regular meetings could help the two nations understand each others' intentions more clearly . currently , there is mutual uncertainty and mistrust over space goals , resulting in the need for worst - case planning . offsetting the need for china's unilateral development . collaborating with china — instead of isolating it — may keep the country dependent on u.s. technology rather than forcing it to develop technologies alone . this can give the united states leverage in other areas of the relationship . cost savings . china now has the economic standing to support joint space cooperation . cost - sharing of joint projects could help nasa achieve its challenging work load in the near future . some have argued that u.s. space commerce has suffered from the attempt to isolate china while doing little to keep sensitive technology out of china . information and data sharing . how was the decision made to conduct a test that would contradict beijing's publicly - held position on the peaceful use of outer space , and that would almost certainly incur international condemnation ? some speculate that the united states' unilateral positions encouraged china to conduct the test to demonstrate that it could not be ignored . in particular , the u.s. national space policy issued in september 2006 declares that the united states would "deny , if necessary , adversaries the use of space capabilities hostile to u.s. national interests. given china's apparent commitment to space , the growing u.s. dependence on space for security and military use , and chinese concerns over taiwan , the asat test may have been a demonstration of strategic chinese deterrence . others saw a more nefarious display of china's space capabilities , and a sign that china has more ambitious objectives in space . still others speculate that the engineers running china's asat program simply wanted to verify the technology that they had spent decades developing and significantly underestimated the international outrage the test provoked . the chinese asat test seemed to derail any movement to build on the meeting between nasa and cnsa . some believe that china's asat test will continue to dampen momentum that might have been building for the two countries to expand cooperation , while others argue that it is a pressing reason to boost dialogue . some of the most important challenges of expanding cooperation in space with china include: inadvertent technology transfer . from this perspective , increased space cooperation with china should be avoided until chinese intentions are clearer . joint space activities could lead to more rapid ( dual - use ) technology transfer to china , and in a worst - case scenario , result in a "space pearl harbor," as postulated by a congressionally appointed commission led by donald rumsfeld in 2001 . moral compromise . china is widely criticized for its record on human rights and non - democratic governance . any collaboration that improves the standing of authoritarian chinese leaders might thus be viewed as unacceptable .