one has been to secure open markets for u.s. exports . profits from this venture would accrue mainly to company officials and stockholders of the company . the laid off factory workers may find new jobs , but they may not always pay as well as the previous ones . other economists counter that raising productivity , innovation , and education and training levels are keys to ensuring u.s. global competitiveness and high paying jobs . they further contend that the united states cannot isolate itself from the global economy , and that protectionist measures to try to restrict imports that negatively affect certain domestic industries will adversely affect other industries and have a net negative impact on the u.s. economy . most trade analysts on both sides of the free trade argument contend that some sort of assistance and / or retraining should be afforded to workers that are displaced by trade ( although opinions differ as to what extent that assistance should be given ) . u.s. post - world war ii trade policy under various presidential administrations has had several interrelated objectives . a second has been to protect domestic producers from foreign unfair trade practices and from rapid surges in fairly traded imports . a third has been to control trade for foreign policy and national security reasons . a fourth objective has been to help foster global trade to promote world economic growth . in fulfilling these objectives , u.s. policymakers have employed an array of policy tools . the direction of u.s. trade policy is likely to be a hotly contested issue among u.s. policymakers over the next several years . challenges include reaching a consensus on how to lower the u.s. trade deficit ( without slowing the economy ) , the design and funding of programs to assist displaced workers , the extent u.s. trade remedy laws should be used to respond to unfair trade practices ( without becoming protectionist ) , policies the federal government can initiate to help the u.s. economy become more globally competitive , strategies the united states can take to induce other countries to lower their trade barriers ( multilaterally in the wto and / or bilaterally through ftas ) , and the extent that trade policy should be used to promote environment ( eg , global climate change ) and worker rights . reaching a consensus on these issues within congress , as well as between congress and the administration , will likely prove difficult since the stakeholders of trade are widespread and diverse ( eg , in terms of whether free trade benefits them or hurts them ) , and because there are differing opinions over the effects trade has on the u.s. economy , as well as different views over which trade policies are effective in promoting u.s. trade goals . one of the biggest challenges for the next president and congress will be whether tpa , which expired in july 2007 , should be renewed , thus enabling the president to pursue additional bilateral , regional , and multilateral trade agreements .