the jsf was designed from the beginning as a multinational aircraft . technology transfer issues remain , but their resolution will likely be far easier than those presented by the f - 22 . while the jsf is not as fast or nimble as the f - 22 , its radar and avionics are more advanced . the jsf may be well suited to japan's self - defense requirements while presenting a less offensive capability . the f / a - 18 / e / f super hornet is the most capable fighter aircraft flown by the u.s. navy . it does not offer stealth technology like the f - 22 or jsf , but is expected to be in the active inventory through at least 2020 and will retain its combat edge through upgrades and modifications . the super hornet's manufacturer , boeing , recently signed its first export deal with australia . the f - 15 eagle has been the u.s. air force's top fighter aircraft since it was fielded in the 1970s . factors that argue against a particular arms transfer include the likelihood of technology proliferation and the potential for undermining regional stability . there appear to be at least four u.s. alternatives to the f - 22 and several from europe that japan might consider . each alternatives presents strengths and weaknesses in terms of operational capabilities , and also vis - a - vis the security , proliferation , and industrial base issues outlined in this report . today , japan operates 203 f - 15 aircraft . by purchasing additional f - 15 aircraft instead of importing a new type of fighter , japan could potentially realize economies of scale savings in training , maintenance , and supplies by operating a larger fleet . the f - 15 is not as capable as the f - 22 or jsf , but if upgraded , and operated in conjunction with support aircraft — such as awacs and electronic warfare aircraft — might be sufficiently capable to meet japan's needs . another alternative would be to develop or import a ucav . uavs such as the usaf predator are relatively well established weapons platforms , but limited compared to uavs designed from the beginning as combat platforms . while advocates believe that ucavs represent the future of combat aviation , true , dedicated combat uavs have not yet been fielded . pursuing ucavs versus manned aircraft could be perceived as either avant garde or premature . japan could import an advanced combat aircraft from sweden ( the jas gripen ) , russia ( su - 30 flanker and mig - 29 fulcrum series ) , or from a consortium of european countries ( the eurofighter typhoon ) . japan has relied almost exclusively on u.s. military imports in the past , and many believe it unlikely that it would import from non - u.s. sources . purchasing european aircraft , however , would allow japan to establish a second source of technology , and thus some autonomy from the united states , and european governments would be expected to offer very attractive terms to penetrate the heretofore closed japanese market .