japan . under the u.s. - japan security treaty , u.s. concerns involved possible conflict between china and japan over their competing claims to the senkaku islands ( called diaoyu islands by china ) in the east china sea . taiwan , asserting itself as the republic of china ( roc ) , also claims the islands as the diaoyutai islands . the united states administered the islands after world war ii and turned them over to japanese administration in 1972 . officials of the bill clinton , george w. bush , and barack obama administrations have stated that the senkaku islands fall under the scope of the u.s. - japan alliance . i nfrastructure . as u.s. forces relocate to guam , the state of its civilian infrastructure has been of concern to some policy makers . also , guam's political leaders have expressed concerns about the impact of additional deployments on its civilian infrastructure , including utilities , roads , and water supplies . guam's location in the western pacific also requires construction of protection for u.s. forces and assets against typhoons . in addition , guam's size , remoteness , and conditions raised more questions about hosting and educating military dependents ; training on guam and with other units in asia , hawaii , or the west coast ; and greater costs and time for extended logistical support , shipment of supplies , and long - distance travel . addressing another concern , a former commander of marine forces pacific urged in 2007 that guam's buildup include more than infrastructure to develop also human capital , communities , and the environment . the defense department requested $106.4 million in fy2014 for water and wastewater projects and requested an additional $80.6 million in fy2015 for the water and wastewater infrastructure . s trategic t arget . a concern is that guam's higher military profile could increase its potential as a strategic target for terrorists and adversaries during a conflict . for example , potential prc and dprk missile attacks could raise guam's need for missile defense and hardening of facilities . some officials say that hardening could depend on the use of hangars , with less need of hardening for marines who deploy for training and more need of hardening for the air force's aircraft based at andersen for power projection . a third option is selective hardening of some facilities . china is believed to have deployed missiles that could target forces on or near guam , considered by china as part of the "second island chain" from which it needs to break out of perceived u.s. - led "encirclement. china's missiles that could target guam include the df - 3a ( css - 2 ) medium - range ballistic missiles ( mrbms ) and land - attack cruise missiles ( lacms ) launched from upgraded , longer - range h - 6k bombers . china also has deployed dh - 10 lacms and df - 21d anti - ship ballistic missiles ( asbms ) to target aircraft carriers and other ships . while the df - 21d's initial range could be 1,500-2,000 km ( 930-1,240 mi ) , a more advanced variant could extend the range to about 3,000 km ( 1,860 mi ) and reach guam .