our law should not be that rigid . pregnancy often comes more than once to the same woman , and in the general population , if man is to survive , it will always be with us . however , the court has held that this exception applies only in "exceptional situations," where the plaintiff "can make a reasonable showing that he will again be subjected to the alleged illegality. if a defendant voluntarily terminates the allegedly unlawful conduct after the lawsuit has been filed but retains the power to resume the practice at any time , a federal court may deem the case nonmoot . the "heavy burden" of persuading the court that a case has been mooted by the defendant's voluntary actions lies with the party asserting mootness , and the standard for such a determination is a "stringent" one: "if subsequent events ma[ke] it absolutely clear that the allegedly wrongful behavior [can] not reasonably be expected to recur. this exception is supported by the supreme court because , in addition to ensuring that the defendant is not "free to return to his old ways," there is "a public interest in having the legality of the practices settled. for example , an environmental group had filed a citizen suit under the clean water act against laidlaw , a company that operated a wastewater treatment plant , alleging that the plant had discharged far more toxic pollutants into a river than it was allowed under terms of a government - issued permit . however , after the lawsuit began , laidlaw began to comply with the discharge limit . the supreme court held that this case was not moot because it was a "disputed factual matter" whether the company's substantial compliance with its permit requirements , or its closure of the facility in question ( which had occurred after the court of appeals had issued its decision ) , would make "it absolutely clear that laidlaw's permit violations could not reasonably be expected to recur. when the claim of the named plaintiff in a certified class action becomes moot , the class action will not be dismissed so long as a member of the class continues to have a sufficiently adversarial relationship to constitute a live controversy . for example , a plaintiff brought a class action to challenge a one - year residency requirement in a state divorce statute , on the ground that it violated the u.s. constitution . by the time her case reached the supreme court , she had long since satisfied the state's durational residency requirement , a development that , had she filed the suit only on her own behalf , would have made the case moot because she no longer retained a personal stake in the outcome . however , the court noted the significant fact that she had brought the lawsuit as a class action in a representative capacity , which affected the mootness determination: "when the district court certified the propriety of the class action , the class of unnamed persons described in the certification acquired a legal status separate from the interest asserted by [the named representative]," and therefore the article iii "cases or controversies" requirement was satisfied .