an example of a certification letter is provided below . a point of order would not apply to floor amendments . senate earmark disclosure rules apply to any congressional earmark included in either the text of the bill or the committee report accompanying the bill , as well as the conference report and joint explanatory statement . the disclosure requirements apply to items in authorizing legislation , appropriations legislation , and tax measures . furthermore , they apply not only to measures reported by committees but also to unreported measures , amendments , house bills , and conference reports . under senate rule xliv , paragraph 6 , a senator requesting that a congressional earmark be included in a measure is required to provide a written statement to the chair and ranking minority member of the committee of jurisdiction that includes the senator's name ; the name and address of the intended earmark recipient ( if there is no specific recipient , the location of the intended activity should be included ) ; in the case of a limited tax or tariff benefit , identification of the individual or entities reasonably anticipated to benefit to the extent known to the senator ; the purpose of the earmark ; and a certification that neither the senator nor the senator's immediate family has a financial interest in such an earmark . it is important to note that , when submitting earmark requests , individual committees and subcommittees often have their own additional administrative requirements beyond those required by senate rules ( eg , prioritizing requests or submitting request forms electronically ) . the senate appropriations committee , for example , has stated that it will require members requesting earmarks to post information regarding their earmark requests on their personal website . this information must be posted at the time of the request and must include the purpose of the earmark and why it is a valuable use of taxpayer funds . the committees may also establish relevant policy requirements ( eg , requiring matching funds for earmark requests ) or restrictions ( eg , not considering earmark requests for certain appropriations accounts or disallowing multi - year funding requests ) . in addition , committees and subcommittees often have deadlines , especially for earmark requests in appropriations legislation . for this reason , it is important to check with individual committees and subcommittees to learn of any supplemental earmark request requirements or restrictions . the committee of jurisdiction is responsible for identifying earmarks in the legislative text and any accompanying reports . therefore , when it is not clear whether a senatorial request constitutes an earmark , the committee of jurisdiction may be able to provide guidance . when submitting an earmark request , it may be relevant whether the senator wants the earmark to be included in the text of the bill or the committee report accompanying the bill . committees may make an administrative distinction between these two categories in terms of the submission of earmark requests , and there may be policy implications of an earmark's placement in either the bill text or the committee report .