nclb authorized most esea programs through fy2007 . the general education provisions act ( gepa ) provided an automatic one - year extension of these programs through fy2008 . while most esea programs no longer have an explicit authorization , the programs continue to receive annual appropriations and paraprofessional quality requirements continue to be in place . leas in states that have received an esea flexibility waiver are not restricted in the use of title i - a funds for failing to meet nclb teacher quality and student achievement accountability requirements ; however , all leas still must comply with the law's paraprofessional quality requirements . the 114 th congress has acted on legislation to reauthorize the esea . possible reauthorization issues concerning the paraprofessional provisions in title i include the following: are the assessments used to evaluate paraprofessional quality rigorous enough , and are they adequately tied to academic standards for students ? some consider the parapro and workkeys tests to be the "easy route," and claim they do not measure a instructional aide's ability to improve classroom instruction . might a reauthorized esea be more explicit about the nature of these tests by linking them to other accountability provisions ? should ed be given greater authority to enforce higher standards for paraprofessional assessments ? should the paraprofessional qualification requirements be applied to a broader group of instructional aide s ? for example , should these requirements be applied to all paraprofessionals with instructional responsibilities , not just to those paid with title i - a funds ? should the exceptions currently made for computer lab assistants , translators , and those assisting with parental involvement be curtailed ? is the language regarding "direct supervision" too vague or too difficult to enforce ? do current provisions for the professional development of instructional aide s adequately encourage states to improve the paraprofessional workforce ? should states be given incentives to adopt paraprofessional certification requirements , as have been adopted in some states ? are there other ways to encourage paraprofessional development beyond the minimum qualifications that would positively affect the overall level of instructional quality ? have the paraprofessional qualification requirements significantly affected the extent to which title i - a funds are used to hire these staff ? in particular , have a significant number of paraprofessionals lost their jobs , or been assigned to non - title i - a positions , after the end of the 2005-2006 school year because they were unable to meet the paraprofessional qualification requirements ? has this resulted in an overall decline or improvement in the quality of instruction ? should the roles of states versus leas in setting policies and implementing these requirements be clarified ? particularly in comparison to the teacher quality requirements of the nclb , there has been relatively little guidance from ed , or clarity in the statute , on state - versus - lea roles in the area of paraprofessional qualification requirements . has the result been a constructive form of flexibility or dysfunctional ambiguity ? instructional aides are also increasingly handling classroom responsibilities without supervision . ed's final report on nclb teacher quality implementation indicated that 19% of paraprofessionals spent "at least half of their time working with students in the classroom without a teacher present.