no official action has been taken by the imf on this issue . as noted previously , the imf has no way of enforcing decisions it might make as to whether countries are complying with the exchange rate provisions of article iv . congress is considering legislation ( h.r . 2378 , reported by the house ways and means committee on september 24 , 2010 ) which would seek to address the question of undervalued exchange rates in a way that the sponsors believe is consistent with wto rules . it provides that countervailing duties may be imposed to address possible subsidies that might result when other countries' currencies are fundamentally undervalued . it says that these subsidies may be treated as being "contingent upon export performance" ( a key element of the wto definition ) even if others not exporting also benefit from the subsidy . if this legislation is enacted into law and duties are levied on chinese imports , some analysts believe that china will assert that it is inconsistent with wto rules and will seek remedies through the wto dispute settlement process . there may be a role for the imf in this adjudication process , if world leaders decide that it should be involved . article ii of the gatt agreement says that the valuations used in countries' tariff schedules shall be "expressed in the appropriate currency at the par value accepted or provisionally recognized" by the imf . though the par value exchange system is gone , this language might be construed as giving the imf some role in determining whether the exchange rates used in trade agreements and schedules are appropriate . currency values may be adjusted , it says , as long as this "will not impair the value of the concessions provided" in trade agreements . this language , as well as similar language in article vii , dates from before the adoption of the present floating exchange rate system . however , the effect of inappropriate exchange rates on trade agreements seems to be a continuing concern . article xv says that , when disputes between signatory countries involve questions about balances of payments , foreign exchange reserves or exchange arrangements , gatt countries shall "consult fully with the international monetary fund" and shall accept the imf's determination as to matters of fact and as to whether a country's exchange arrangements are consistent its obligations under the imf articles of agreement . gatt article xv also says that countries "shall not , by exchange action , frustrate the provisions of this agreement nor , by trade action , the intent of the provisions" of the imf articles of agreement . traditionally , these references to "exchange arrangements" have been seen as referring ( as they did when the gatt was created in 1947 ) to currency controls , exchange licenses , transaction taxes and other official actions that limit a potential purchaser's ability to get the foreign exchange needed to purchase goods from abroad . the gatt allows countries to impose temporary import restrictions when they face balance of payments difficulties ( article xii ) or when they are at risk for a serious decline in their foreign exchange reserves ( article xviii ) .