there are no waiting periods for vision services . while the statutes allow for more stringent waiting periods for individuals who do not enroll at their first enrollment opportunity , the brochures for 2008 do not indicate that plans have imposed additional restrictions . enrollees will pay less out - of - pocket costs if they use in - network services . for all dental plans , self + 1 premiums are approximately twice the plan's self - only premium , and family premiums are about three times the plan's self - only premium . several factors should be considered in deciding whether or not to enroll in fedvip , including ( 1 ) coverage of these services in a fehb plan—more likely for those enrolled in a health maintenance organization ( hmo ) , ( 2 ) likelihood of using services covered by the plans , and ( 3 ) placing the same dollar amount that would be used toward dental and / or vision benefits premiums in an fsa ( available to employees and not annuitants ) . each prospective enrollee must weigh these considerations and others against his or her own level of risk aversion , as well as the fact that the individual pays 100% of the premium . under the fedvip program , any coverage provided by an individual's fehb health plan is primary , and the fedvip plans are the secondary payers . however , generally , the nationally available fehb plans , have limited dental and vision coverage . this year , geha added limited vision coverage under its plans , offering an annual eye exam with a $25 copayment . geha , similar to some of the other national plans , has an arrangement with certain providers for discounted eyewear , but the enrollee would still be responsible for 100% of the discounted cost . in contrast , some of the fehb hmo - type plans offer more comprehensive dental and vision benefits . some high - deductible plans also provide some coverage . it is important to compare fehb coverage to determine if also enrolling in fedvip is beneficial . while some enrollees know that they will use services , such an individual who wears glasses or a dependent who will need orthodontics , some services cannot be as easily predicted , such as an individual needing a root canal . individuals must weigh their expected benefits against the premiums . for example , an individual who wears glasses , has a yearly eye exam , and uses a provider in - network may find that paying the premium will result in lower costs than paying for each of these services separately , even with pre - tax fsa funds for employees . on the other hand , an individual who does not wear glasses may not benefit from vision supplemental insurance . there is not , however , a one - to - one correlation between buying any insurance and the expectation of using the services . there is still a large share of unknown risk that any insurance protects against , so that some individuals may find themselves using services that they did not anticipate using .