section 1957 does . it outlaws otherwise innocent transactions contaminated by the origin of the property involved in the transaction . using most of the same definitions as section 1956 , the elements of section 1957 cover anyone who: 1 . a. in the united states , b. in the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the united states , or c. outside the united states if the defendant is an american , 2. knowingly 3 . the offense carries a prison term of not more than five years , but also calls for confiscation of the cash and related property in lieu of a fine . the section was apparently enacted to overcome the consequences of bajakajian . section 1960 outlaws conducting or owning an unlicensed money transmitting business . "money transmitting" is defined broadly by way of a nonexclusive list of examples , such as checks and wire transfers , and includes virtual currency such as bitcoin . the term "business" restricts the offense to an enterprise conducted for profit and one engaged in more than a single qualifying transmission . the section recognizes three categories of transmitting business . one consists of any transmission business operating in a state that requires it to be licensed and criminalizes the failure to do so . the second category consists of any transmitting business operating in a manner that fails to comply with department of the treasury regulations governing such enterprises . the third category consists of any licensed business that transmits money known to be derived from , or intended to finance , criminal activity even if the transmitter is duly licensed . section 1960 offenses are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years and / or a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) . property "involved in" violation of the section is subject to civil and criminal forfeiture . as noted earlier , all rico predicate offenses are by definition money laundering predicate offenses under sections 1956 and 1957 . the crimes that suggest the possibility of a rico offense also suggest the possibility of money laundering . in some money laundering cases , although there is no separate rico violation , prosecution is possible by virtue of the rico shared predicate offense list . in a number of other cases , either money laundering is one of several predicate offenses of a larger rico enterprise or the rico enterprise is devoted primarily to money laundering . rico makes it a federal crime for any person to: 1. conduct or participate , directly or indirectly , in the conduct of 2. the affairs of an enterprise 3. engaged in or the activities of which affect , interstate or foreign commerce 4 . a. through the collection of an unlawful debt , or b. through a pattern of racketeering activity ( predicate offenses ) . section 1962 ( d ) outlaws conspiracy to violate any of section 1962's substantive prohibitions ; in the case of conspiracy to violate section 1962 ( c ) , it outlaws any agreement of two or more to conduct the affairs of an enterprise through a pattern of rico predicate offenses .