the ntia has not , as of yet , issued these requirements . then fcc chairman martin did not call for their codification . a consensus on this issue has not yet formed , and no stand - alone measures addressing net neutrality have been introduced in the 111 th congress , to date . house communications , technology , and the internet subcommittee chairman boucher has stated that he continues to work with broadband providers and content providers to seek common ground on network management practices , and at this time , is pursuing this approach . however , the net neutrality issue has been narrowly addressed within the context of the economic stimulus package . 111-5 ) contains provisions that require the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , in consultation with the fcc , to establish "... nondiscrimination and network interconnection obligations" as a requirement for grant participants in the broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) . the law further directs that the fcc's four broadband policy principles , issued in august 2005 , are the minimum obligations to be imposed . however , he stated that they will be incorporated into the policymaking activities of the commission . for example , one of the agreed upon conditions for the october 2005 approval of both the verizon / mci and the sbc / at&t mergers was an agreement made by the involved parties to commit , for two years , "... to conduct business in a way that comports with the commission's ( september 2005 ) internet policy statement.... " in a further action at&t included in its concessions to gain fcc approval of its merger to bellsouth to adhering , for two years , to significant net neutrality requirements . under terms of the merger agreement , which was approved on december 29 , 2006 , at&t agreed to not only uphold , for 30 months , the fcc's internet policy statement principles , but also committed , for two years ( expired december 2008 ) , to stringent requirements to "... maintain a neutral network and neutral routing in its wireline broadband internet access service. in perhaps one of its most significant actions relating to its internet policy statement to date , the fcc , on august 1 , 2008 , ruled that comcast corp. , a provider of internet access over cable lines , violated the fcc's policy statement , when it selectively blocked peer - to - peer connections in an attempt to manage its traffic . this practice , the fcc concluded , "... unduly interfered with internet users' rights to access the lawful internet content and to use the applications of their choice. while no monetary penalties were imposed , comcast is required to stop these practices by the end of 2008 . comcast stated that it will comply with the order , but it has filed an appeal in the u.s. dc court of appeals . separately , in an april 2007 action , the fcc released a notice of inquiry ( wc docket no .