recapture of funds . as originally enacted , hera required a community or state to reinvest all profits earned during the first five years following its enactment in additional sales , rentals , redevelopment , and rehabilitation of foreclosed homes and properties . after the five - year period , all profits could be recaptured by the federal government and deposited in the u.s. treasury unless hud approved a request to allow a community or state to continue to use funds to finance activities eligible for assistance under hera . the five - year recapture provision was eliminated with the passage of arra . other nsp provisions of hera have the same requirements as funds appropriated under the regular cdbg program . for the sole purpose of expediting the use of funds under hera , however , hud issued alternative requirements to those governing the regular cdbg appropriations , except for requirements related to fair housing , nondiscrimination , labor standards , and environmental review . in addition , hera: prohibits funds from being used in economic development projects involving the use of eminent domain ; limits the income of individuals and families who may benefit from assistance provided by the act to those whose incomes do not exceed 120% of the area's median income ; requires a state and local government to certify that at least 25% of the amount allocated by the act would be used to purchase and redevelop housing for individuals and families whose incomes do not exceed 50% of the area's median income ( ami ) ; and requires that each state receives a minimum allocation of 0.5% of the amount appropriated . table 1 presents data from hud showing the distribution of nsp - 1 funds by state . according to hud , by september 30 , 2010 , nsp - 1 grantees had obligated 101.6% of their program funds within the 18-month time frame specified by the authorizing statute . hud also reported that nsp - 1 grantees expended 49.1% of their grant funds by november 2010 . further , hud reported that nsp - 1 grantees had committed and expended 14% of their grant funds to meet the requirement that at least 25% of program funds be used to benefit households whose incomes do not exceed 50% of the area's median income ( ami ) . during the first month of the 111 th congress , members debated the passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r . arra , which was signed by president obama on february 17 , 2009 , as p.l . 111-5 , sought to mitigate the effects of the economic recession . on february 13 , 2009 , both the house and the senate passed the conference version of the act , which includes $2 billion for nsp activities . the act gave hud until september 30 , 2010 , to allocate funds to eligible recipients . recipients are required to spend at least half of the funds within two years of allocation , and 100% within three years of the date funds are allocated . 3221 into law as p.l . 110-289 on july 30 , 2008 .