the administration states that ratification of this treaty is a priority . on february 6 , 2008 , the president transmitted the treaty to the senate for its advice and consent to ratification . upon the president's transmittal of the convention to the senate for consideration , the white house press secretary released a statement justifying the need for ratification , stating that it would "solidify our nation's place as a leader in the worldwide effort to rid athletics of cheating through chemistry. many , including members of congress , argue that international commitments to anti - doping can help set a positive example for elite and aspiring athletes and help discourage their use of performance - enhancing substances . a major impetus for u.s. action on ratifying this treaty stems from a concern that lack of ratification would result in a ban from hosting and participating in some international competitions , including future olympic games . the ioc requires that governments become a party to the international convention against doping in sport by january 1 , 2009 — and failure to do so would result in those countries being barred from participation in future games and could also affect a city's bid for hosting the 2016 olympics . chicago is the u.s. olympic committee's candidate for the 2016 games . the ioc plans to announce its selection for the 2016 olympics in october 2009 . the international convention against doping in sport does not apply to u.s. professional sports . some athletes of u.s. professional teams , however , may already follow the code — whose guidelines the convention embraces — when they participate in international tournaments under the jurisdiction of organizations that already implement the code . this has already been the case , for example , when national basketball association or national hockey league players participate in the olympic games or world championships . some observers , however , question whether the code sufficiently protects athletes who may be accidentally implicated in a doping violation . these critics argue that the code imposes excessively stringent punishments , including potentially career - ending suspensions , that offer little distinction between intentional doping and the detection of trace levels of prohibited substances originating from the consumption of contaminated or mislabeled nutritional supplements . some of these concerns may be addressed in revised version of the code , which will go into effect january 1 , 2009 . further , some question the legitimacy of wada as an authority in international anti - doping policy , accusing wada of not being sufficiently transparent in its decision making and resistant to outside scrutiny . some critics have also questioned wada procedures for handling drug testing samples and avoiding contamination , as well as for dealing with false positives and other potential testing mistakes . the international convention against doping in sport commits states parties to funding wada and domestic anti - doping tests . although ratification of the convention does not impose new costs upon the u.s. government , it would commit the united states to continuing such funding in the future .