this argument has some flaws . first , section 9 , as noted , prohibits "takes" only as to endangered species , while the polar bear was listed as threatened . here matters become more complex . by general rule , the fws long ago extended the section 9 "take" prohibition to threatened species as well . threatened species with atypical management needs , however , are subject instead to "special rules. judicial attitudes toward the causal proximity required by the esa may be influenced by a supreme court decision in 2007 , massachusetts v. epa , holding that epa has authority under the clean air act ( caa ) to regulate ghgs from new motor vehicles . relevant here is the court's discussion of massachusetts's standing to bring the suit . there , it found that the reduction in automobile ghg emissions sought by the state was likely to yield a non - negligible benefit to the state — slowing down its loss of shorelands to sea level rise — thus satisfying the "redressability" requirement of standing doctrine . the analogy between massachusetts's loss of shoreland and the polar bears' loss of sea ice is evident , though standing law and the esa are admittedly very different contexts . finally , there is the question of whether the effect of a particular ghg emissions source on polar bear habitat is de minimis . while section 9 applies to persons , section 7 applies only to federal agencies . it demands that each federal agency "insure that any action authorized , funded , or carried out by such agency ... is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of [designated critical habitat]. to minimize the chance of "jeopardy" or "adverse modification," section 7 creates a consultation process . if any listed species is present in the area of the proposed action , the agency proposing to act prepares a "biological assessment" identifying any such species likely to be affected , and setting out relevant details of the action and available information on its potential effects . the agency must then consult with the fws , which prepares a "biological opinion" as to how the proposed action will affect the species or designated critical habitat . if the biological opinion finds jeopardy or adverse modification , the fws must propose "reasonable and prudent alternatives" that the action agency or permit applicant can take to eliminate jeopardy or adverse modification . based on the argument above for "takes," the argument may be made that the proposal of a federal action "authoriz[ing] , fund[ing] , or [carrying] out" substantial emissions of ghgs triggers section 7 consultation . and just as section 9 has a habitat modification component , so does section 7 , though only where critical habitat has been formally designated . moreover , case law supports the triggering of section 7 consultation even when the effect of an agency action is remote from the area of agency action . if sanctioned by the courts , this argument for section 7 consultation would effectively require an agency to adopt any reasonable and prudent alternatives proposed by the fws , which presumably could include reduction of ghg emissions .