ataka ( attack ! , a group that mixes far - right xenophobia with leftist economic populism , won a surprising 21 seats . three center - right groups won the remaining seats: the union of democratic forces ( 20 ) ; democrats for a strong bulgaria ( 17 ) ; and the bulgarian national union coalition ( 13 ) . in an effort to boost turnout , the government introduced a lottery in which voters could win televisions , cars , and other prizes . nevertheless , turnout was only 55% , the lowest since the end of communism . all parties pledged to exclude ataka from the government . nevertheless , analysts were concerned about the group's electoral success , which shows significant public dissatisfaction with bulgaria's political class . experts note that it has been a common phenomenon in central and eastern europe that when a former communist party ( such as the bsp ) moves to the center , often as part of european integration efforts , its place in the political spectrum is often taken over by populist and nationalist groups . the process of forming a new government proved difficult , in part because of the scattered distribution of the vote and personal animosity among party leaders , including within the center - right portion of the political spectrum . the stalemate was finally resolved on august 15 , when the parliament approved a new coalition government . it is composed of the bsp , mrf , and nmsp , with bsp leader sergei stanishev as prime minister . critics claim that stanishev is a relatively weak leader and that real power rests in the hands of party barons , particularly in the bsp and mrf . this situation , they say , has hindered reform implementation and the fight against corruption . despite the defection of some nmsp deputies to the opposition in 2007 , the government retains a majority and appears determined to stay in power until 2009 , when new elections must be held . a new party , citizens for the european development of bulgaria ( cedb ) , is not currently represented in parliament , but could win a large number of seats in new elections . the cedb , led by sofia mayor boiko borisov , espouses pro - eu and pro - law - and - order policies . the current coalition could face a serious challenge if a number of small center - right parties in the current parliament can form an alliance with the cedb . president georgi purvanov , backed by the bsp , won re - election in 2006 . although purvanov is one of bulgaria's most popular political figures , most political power is held by the prime minister and government ; the bulgarian presidency is relatively weak . bulgaria is one of the poorest countries in europe . according to the world bank , its per capita income is only 56% of that of the eight central and eastern european countries that joined the eu in 2004 . as in many other transition countries , sofia and other urban areas are more prosperous than rural ones , which have suffered an exodus of young people .