they were similar to h.r . 5405 and s. 2824 , introduced in the 109 th congress . they would have amended section 404 so that each registered public accounting firm preparing or issuing an audit report for an issuer would have been required to attest to and report on the management assessment of the issuer . the attestation and report on the assessment made by the management of the issuer would not have included a separate opinion on the outcome of the assessment . this attestation and report would have been required to be performed at three - year intervals . the attestation would have been required to be made in accordance with standards adopted by the board . the sec would have had to develop a standard of materiality for the conduct of the assessment and report on an internal control based upon whether the internal control had a material affect on the company's financial statements and was significant to the issuer's overall financial status . the bills would have permitted a smaller public company not to be subject to section 404 . a "smaller public company" was defined as having a total market capitalization for the relevant reporting period of less than $700 million and total product and services revenue for the reporting period of less than $125 million or at the beginning of the reporting period fewer than 1,500 record beneficial owners . the sec and the board would have had to conduct a study examining the lack of and impediments to robust competition for the performance of audits for issuers . the sec and the board would have also been required to conduct a study comparing and contrasting the principles - based turnbull guidance under the securities laws of great britain to the implementation of section 404 of sarbanes - oxley . several other bills affecting compliance with section 404 were introduced in the 110 th congress . bills introduced in the 111 th congress to provide an exemption for small companies from the requirements of section 404 included h.r . on november 4 , 2009 , the house financial services committee recommended h.r . 3817 , the investor protection act , which contained a clause , inserted as a bipartisan amendment , permanently exempting businesses with a market capitalization up to $75 million from complying with the auditing requirements of section 404 . the sec and others would study how the burden of compliance with section 404 could be reduced for companies valued between $75 million and $250 million and whether reducing or eliminating their compliance with section 404 would encourage these companies to offer their shares to the public on united states exchanges . this bill was included in h.r . any such attestation shall not be the subject of a separate engagement . the provision's controversy stems from charges that some aspects of sarbanes - oxley , particularly section 404 , are overly burdensome and costly for small and medium - sized companies . for example , one critic has stated that the costs of section 404 are "extreme.