there is no sovereign immunity , according to existing statute ( 28 u.s.c.a . § 1605 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) , in circumstances in which the [judicial] action is based upon a commercial activity carried on in the united states by the foreign state ; or upon an act performed in the united states in connection with a commercial activity of the foreign state elsewhere ; or upon an act outside the territory of the united states in connection with a commercial activity of the foreign state elsewhere and that act causes a direct effect in the united states ; s. 2557 , for example , would have stated specifically that actions brought pursuant to the sherman act do not trigger sovereign immunity , but the provision did not define opec as a "country" for purposes of the act ; such a lack could present a problem for two reasons . the s. 2557 language did not , seemingly , add meaningfully to the general "commercial activity exception" language of fsia . the final provisions of section 6 would add language to 28 u.s.c . the former "analyze[d] in detail the multiple factors that affect supply and demand — and thus prices for gasoline ... ; the latter , an interim report , was produced in response to congressional directives , and outlines the commission's rationale and methods for combining the mandated studies . tasking the ftc with the study and reporting requirements contained in sections 3 and 4 , in addition to those contained in other legislation , might result in the commission's inability to conduct timely enforcement activities and / or continue its program to monitor "weekly average gasoline and diesel prices in 360 cities nationwide to find and , if necessary , recommend appropriate action on pricing anomalies that might indicate anticompetitive conduct. provisions similar to the nopec provisions of s. 2557 , an apparent attempt to nullify the courts' refusal , in 1979 , to sanction a suit against opec by the international ass'n of machinists and aerospace workers ( iam ) , would not necessarily accomplish the presumed goal of precluding opec's influence on gasoline prices . first , a provision that would add language to the sherman act to make certain actions unlawful under that statute , may be redundant: those actions taken abroad by a non - sovereign that have the requisite effect on u.s. commerce are already reachable under the u.s. antitrust laws , even absent specific statutory authorization . as stated by the united states court of appeals for the second circuit in 1945: we should not impute to congress an intent to punish all whom its courts can catch , for conduct which has no consequences within the united states . american banana co. v. united fruit co. , 213 u.s. 347 , 357 , .... on the other hand , it is settled law ... that any state may impose liabilities , even upon persons not within its allegiance , for conduct outside its borders that has consequences within its borders which the state reprehends ; and these liabilities other states will ordinarily recognize .