b . "security countermeasure" is defined in division c as it is defined in ยง 319f - 2 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of the public health service act , as a drug , biological product , or device ( as those terms are defined in the fdca ) that the secretary of hhs approves as necessary to diagnose , mitigate , prevent , or treat harm from any biological , chemical , radiological , or nuclear agent . c. "drug," "biological product," and "device" are all defined by the fdca . on january 26 , 2007 , secretary michael o. leavitt made the first such declaration "to provide targeted liability protections for pandemic countermeasures based on a credible risk that an avian influenza virus spreads and evolves into a strain capable of causing a pandemic of human influenza. since then , the secretary of hhs has issued additional declarations covering various countermeasures against anthrax , botulism , acute radiation syndrome , smallpox , and various strains of influenza . most recently , in response to the h1n1 influenza pandemic , secretary kathleen sebelius issued declarations limiting liability for harm arising from the use of certain influenza antivirals and vaccines . the single circumstance in which division c allows a covered person to be held liable is when a "death or serious physical injury" was caused by the "willful misconduct" of a covered person . division c defines "willful misconduct" as an act or omission that is taken " ( i ) intentionally to achieve a wrongful purpose ; ( ii ) knowingly without legal or factual justification ; and ( iii ) in disregard of a known or obvious risk that is so great as to make it highly probable that the harm will outweigh the benefit. in addition , the secretary of hhs , in consultation with the attorney general , "shall promulgate regulations ... that further restrict the scope of actions or omissions by a covered person that may qualify as 'willful misconduct.' furthermore , "the plaintiff shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence willful misconduct by each covered person sued and that such willful misconduct caused the death or serious physical injury. the "clear and convincing" standard is higher than the usual burden of proof in civil cases , which is proof by a "preponderance of the evidence. finally , if an act or omission by a manufacturer or distributor is subject to regulation by division c or by the fdca , then such act or omission shall not constitute willful misconduct if neither the secretary of hhs nor the attorney general has initiated an enforcement action with respect to the act or omission , or if such an enforcement action has been initiated and the enforcement action has been terminated or finally resolved without a specified penalty imposed on the covered person . the proceeding in which an injured party may seek to prove that a covered person had engaged in willful misconduct is a new federal cause of action that division c created ; suits under state tort law are prohibited .