the appearance generally is given that these choices are being made at the party congress itself . but the decisions almost always are made ahead of time by a select group of senior leaders , then ratified at the congress in a public demonstration of political unity that belies months of political infighting , negotiation , and compromise . the october 2007 session was the 17 th of these party congresses held since the founding of the chinese communist party and the first full congress held under the leadership of party secretary hu jintao , who ascended to that post at the 16 th party congress in 2002 . the 17 th party congress brought no surprises in terms of substantive policy decisions . in keeping with established practice , party general secretary ( hereafter secretary ) hu jintao opened the congress by presenting a lengthy political report extolling the party's accomplishments over the past five years and noting problems the party still has to address . the report , the product of months of work among senior leaders , includes issues on which the party has been able to agree . in the past , its relatively unwieldy size and its lack of a known formalized meeting schedule have suggested that the full politburo has been involved only when the stakes are high — as when considering major policy shifts , dealing with matters of immediate urgency , or when a higher level of legitimization of a particular policy direction is necessary . but some now maintain that the politburo emerging from the 17 th party congress may end up being more involved in routine decision - making than previous politburos . broader politburo participation , according to this view , is more likely under the increasingly collective leadership that china has been moving toward in the years since chairman mao zedong as "paramount leader" effectively wielded vast decision - making power . with only one female member — the newly appointed liu yandong — the new politburo continues the prc tradition of male - dominated decision - making bodies . four well - known politburo members , all born before 1940 , stepped down from those positions at the 17 th party congress . they included wu yi , a frequent contact for u.s. government officials and named by forbes in 2007 as the world's second most powerful woman ; and three members of the politburo standing committee: zeng qinghong , china's current vice - president ; wu guanzheng , primarily responsible for china's anti - corruption work ; and luo gan , the only protégé of former premier li peng named to the previous , 16 th party congress politburo . the retirements of these four suggest the seriousness of the prc leadership about mandatory retirement for politburo members at the age of 68 . the establishment of unofficial retirement age requirements for party cadres at senior levels of leadership and the imposition of "term limits" for top - level positions in the party and government have been part of the incremental political reforms prc leaders have made since 1978 . the 17 th congress demonstrated the party's continued willingness to adhere to these agreed - upon requirements .