government. rel . sanders , the navy contracted with two shipyards to build destroyers . the shipyards subcontracted with allison engine company to build generator sets ( gen - sets ) , which would provide electrical power for the destroyers . allison engine subcontracted with general tool company ( which also used a subcontractor ) to manufacture different parts needed for the gen - sets . the navy's contracts with the shipyards required that all parts of the destroyers , including the gen - sets , be constructed in accordance with navy specifications . this requirement was included in the contracts with the subcontractors . in addition , the contracts required that each gen - set come with a certificate of conformance that certified the unit met the navy's requirements . all of the money used to pay the contractors for the work on the gen - sets ultimately came from the u.s. treasury . former employees of general tool company , roger sanders and roger thacker ( the relators ) , brought actions against allison engine company and other subcontractors under §§ 3729 ( a ) ( 1 ) - ( 3 ) of the fca , alleging fraud with respect to the construction of the gen - sets . the relators contended that the subcontractors knew that there were defects in the construction of the gen - sets and that the gen - sets did not conform to navy specifications . still , the subcontractors submitted invoices to the shipyards for payment , which constituted "false or fraudulent claims" paid by the government in violation of the fca . during the jury trial before the district court , the relators produced evidence that the subcontractors had issued certificates of conformance containing false statements that the gen - sets complied with navy requirements , as well as invoices that the subcontractors presented to the shipyards . however , the relators did not provide evidence of the subcontractors or the shipyards submitting a false claim to the navy . while the subcontractors argued that the relators' claim failed because there was no demonstration that the false claims were presented to the government , the relators asserted that their claim under the fca was sufficient because government funds had been used to pay the invoices that were presented to the shipyards . the district court agreed with the subcontractors and granted their motion for judgment as a matter of law . the court concluded that in order to sustain a claim under §§ 3729 ( a ) ( 1 ) and ( a ) ( 2 ) of the fca , there must be a showing that a false claim was presented to the u.s. government . on appeal , the sixth circuit reversed the district court in relevant part and found the subcontractors liable under the fca .