the european union appealed . the ab report , issued on april 7 , 2004 , first addressed the relationship between gatt article i:1 and the enabling clause . the ab upheld the panel's findings that the enabling clause is an exception to gatt article i:1 and that the enabling clause does not exclude the applicability of article i:1 . the ab explained that the enabling clause is to be read together with article i:1 in the procedural sense , since a challenged measure , such as the drug arrangements , is "submitted successively to the test of compatibility with the two provisions. in other words , when the enabling clause is implicated , the dispute panel first examines whether a measure is consistent with article i:1 , "as the general rule," and , if it is found not to be so , the panel then examines whether the measure may be justified under the enabling clause . noting the "vital role" played by the enabling clause "in promoting trade as a means of stimulating economic growth and development" and the intent of wto members through the enabling clause to encourage the adoption of preference schemes , the ab found that the enabling clause was not a typical gatt exception or defense . thus , the ab modified the panel's finding and held that , unlike the ordinary practice with respect to gatt exceptions , under which exceptions are invoked only by the responding party , "it was incumbent upon [complainant] india to raise the enabling clause in making its claim of inconsistency with article i:1 of the gatt 1994" and to identify specific provisions of the enabling clause which it believed were violated by the respondent's measure . at the same time , the burden of justifying gsp schemes under the cited enabling clause provisions still rests on a respondent . in application , the ab found that india sufficiently raised the issue , thereby placing the burden on the eu to justify the drug arrangements under the enabling clause . most important , the ab reversed the panel's substantive decision regarding the breadth of acceptable preference programs under the enabling clause . the ab found instead that developed countries can grant preferences beyond those provided in their gsp to developing countries with particular needs , but only if identical treatment is available to all similarly situated gsp beneficiaries . the ab elaborated that similarly situated gsp beneficiaries are all gsp beneficiaries that have the "'development , financial and trade needs' to which the treatment in question is intended to respond. in reaching this conclusion , the ab reversed the panel's reading of the term "non - discriminatory" as used to define the gsp in the enabling clause . even under the more expansive view of the clause , however , the ab upheld the panel's ruling that the eu had failed to prove that the drug arrangements were in fact "non - discriminatory.