major provisions are summarized below . energy markets have seen turmoil in recent years: prices have been high and unusually volatile , there have been numerous episodes of fraud , and many suspect that energy prices have been driven artificially high by excessive speculation . during the california electricity crisis of 2000 , severe shortages were combined with soaring prices , and several energy trading firms ( including enron ) were found to have manipulated the partially deregulated electricity marketing system that california had established . what kinds of customers are in need of government protection ? these are the basic questions for congressional oversight of the commodity exchange act ( cea ) . the commodity futures modernization act of 2000 ( cfma ) in several respects , the cfma was a fundamental rethinking of the government's role in derivatives markets . before 2000 , the cea was intended to regulate all forms of derivative trading ; any contract "in the character of" a futures contract was to be traded only under cftc regulation . however , this "one - size - fits - all" regulatory scheme did not correspond to the reality of the marketplace , where a very large over - the - counter ( otc , that is , off - exchange ) derivatives market was flourishing without cftc oversight . under the cfma , most trading in otc derivatives was placed beyond the reach of the cea ( and thus the cftc ) . where trading was off - limits to small investors , market discipline was deemed to be a sufficient regulatory force . the exception was for contracts based on agricultural commodities , which were thought to be susceptible to price manipulation . as a result , the cfma did not provide a statutory exemption for otc agricultural derivatives . the derivatives market in farm commodities is dominated by exchange - traded futures contracts . the cfma provided for the creation of unregulated futures exchanges , where all trading involved sophisticated or professional investors . ( again , there is an exception for farm derivatives. ) potentially , therefore , the futures exchanges can reconfigure themselves into largely unregulated entities , and several such entities have registered with the cftc . however , since the enactment of the cfma , the major futures exchanges continue to operate in ( more or less ) the same regulatory environment as before . both the exchanges and the otc markets have experienced strong growth in trading volumes since 2000 . given the cftc's satisfaction with its role under the cfma , the growth of trading volumes , and continued innovation in the markets , few in the congress saw the need for another thorough overhaul of the cea . during hearings before the house and senate agriculture committees , however , the cftc and industry participants suggested several areas where fine - tuning of the cfma might be desirable . several of these issues were addressed by the reauthorization legislation enacted by the 110 th congress — title xiii of the farm bill ( p.l . 2419 ) , enacted over the president's veto on may 22 , 2008 , and authorizing appropriations for the cftc through fy2012 .