these proposals were not enacted into law . bills have been introduced in the 111 th congress to modify requirements on states and localities concerning the sharing of immigration - related information with the federal government . 150 , the illegal alien crime reporting act of 2009 , introduced by representative walter b. jones , would bar any state or subdivision thereof from receiving funds under any program or activity administered by the department of homeland security , unless the state reports to the federal bureau of investigation certain immigration - related information regarding persons who have been arrested , charged with , or convicted of a crime by the state . s. 95 , introduced by senator david vitter , would prohibit any funds appropriated for the community oriented policing services program from being used in contravention of iirira § 642 . 264 , the save america comprehensive immigration act of 2009 , introduced by representative sheila jackson - lee , would repeal iirira § 642 and prwora § 434 , thereby permitting states and localities to restrict the sharing of immigration - related information with federal authorities . the constitutionality of the foregoing provisions was challenged by the city of new york . the mayor of the city of new york had issued an executive order prohibiting any city officer or employee , in most circumstances , from transmitting information regarding immigration status to federal immigration authorities . this executive order was in direct conflict with both prwora § 434 and iirira § 642 . the united states court of appeals for the second circuit held in new york v. united states ( city of new york ) that prwora § 434 and iirira § 642 , on their face , do not violate the anti - commandeering doctrine under the tenth amendment . the anti - commandeering doctrine prohibits the federal government from commandeering either a state's legislature ( eg , by requiring that a state enact particular regulatory standards ) or its executive officers ( eg , by requiring that state officers directly participate in enforcing federal law ) to achieve federal goals . while this might mean that congress cannot directly compel states to collect and share information regarding immigration status with federal immigration authorities , merely prohibiting states and localities from blocking their agents from sharing with the federal government information already in their possession may be permissible , according to the second circuit , absent specific proof of greater interference with state and local functions . although several localities reportedly have adopted formal or informal policies limiting cooperation with federal immigration authorities , the precise number is unclear . in 2006 , congress required the office of the inspector general ( oig ) for the department of justice to study and report on whether states and localities receiving federal compensation for incarcerating criminal aliens were cooperating with federal immigration enforcement efforts . among other things , the oig was required to determine whether any states or localities receiving compensation were in violation of the information - sharing requirements of iirira § 642 .