the dormant commerce clause prohibits state laws that discriminate against interstate commerce . thus , while a state law that "regulates even - handedly to effectuate a legitimate local public interest" and has "only incidental" effect on interstate commerce is constitutionally permissible "unless the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the putative local benefits" ( "the pike test" ) , a discriminatory state law is "virtually per se invalid. in united haulers , the court found "[c]ompelling reasons" for distinguishing between state laws that favor governmental units and those that favor in - state private entities over their competitors . the court , stating that "any notion of discrimination assumes a comparison of substantially similar entities," reasoned that state and local governments are not substantially similar to private entities due to their public welfare responsibilities . these responsibilities , the court explained , meant that laws favoring governmental units have "any number of legitimate goals," while laws favoring in - state private entities generally represent "simple economic protectionism. thus , the court reasoned , such laws should not be viewed with "equal skepticism. the court explained that treating them equally "would lead to unprecedented and unbounded interference by the courts with state and local government," which was particularly inappropriate when the challenged law addressed a traditional government function such as waste disposal . a majority of the court could not agree on the standard under which to examine laws favoring public entities . a plurality of four justices stated that the proper standard was the pike test — that is , whether "the burden imposed on interstate commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the putative local benefits. the plurality did not find the challenged law's burden to be excessive to its benefits , which included providing health and environmental benefits and an effective way to finance waste - disposal services . the dormant commerce clause is not implicated when a state acts as a market participant as opposed to a market regulator . this is because the "commerce clause responds principally to state taxes and regulatory measures impeding free private trade in the national marketplace," and "[t]here is no indication of a constitutional plan to limit the ability of the states themselves to operate freely in the free market. the market participant doctrine does not apply when the state is acting in its governmental capacity by assessing and computing taxes . it appears only two cases have addressed whether state laws taxing interest earned on bonds issued by other states while exempting interest earned on bonds issued by that state violate the commerce clause . in 1994 , an ohio appellate court held in shaper v. tracy that such treatment was constitutional . in 2006 , the kentucky court of appeals held the opposite in kentucky department of revenue v. davis . in november 2007 , the u.s. supreme court heard oral arguments in davis . congress's authority under the commerce clause has been described as plenary and limited only by other constitutional provisions . congress may , therefore , regulate by expressly authorizing the states to take an action that would otherwise be an unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce .