currently , 15 u.s.c . ยง 1012 ( b ) declares that the antitrust laws "shall be applicable to the business of insurance to the extent that such business is not regulated by state law. in addition , they would each have restored the authority of the federal trade commission , pursuant to its 15 u.s.c . ยง 46 ( a ) powers , to investigate the insurance industry ; that authority was removed in 1980 by section 5 of p.l . 96-252 , "federal trade commission antitrust improvements act of 1980," except to the extent that such studies were specifically requested by congress . lastly , each would have permitted the department of justice and the ftc to "issue joint statements of their antitrust enforcement policies regarding joint activities in the business of insurance. if insurers can pool their information , the resulting rates can more accurately reflect risk and thus be lower for consumers as a whole , although some individual consumers may pay higher rates . small insurers particularly benefit from information sharing , as they do not have a large volume of information of their own to analyze . insurance depends critically on insurers possessing a large quantity of information to allow them to judge and price risks accurately . in a theoretical world of perfect information and competition , every consumer would pay a premium that covered his risk , and the resulting overall amount paid by consumers would be the lowest possible amount that would cover the aggregate losses to the group as a whole . the theoretically perfect world , however , assumes competition between insurers that would serve to reduce premium rates ; too much cooperation between insurers could dampen this competition , reducing the consumer benefit that comes from allowing insurers to share information . insurer cooperation and information sharing revolves around advisory organizations , also known as ratings bureaus . some form of these organizations has existed for nearly as long as insurance has existed in the united states . at their most basic form , they gather data from the various insurers , aggregate and analyze this data , and provide the aggregated data back to the insurers for use in setting future rates . in practice , they have done , and continue to do , a good deal more than this . historically , rating bureaus formulated final rates that insurers might charge for particular policies and in some cases required participating insurers to use the bureau's suggested rates . having a central organization create insurance rates , whether mandatory or not , raised serious antitrust concerns . by the early 1990s , the main advisory organizations had ceased publishing fully formed rates . advisory organizations continue , however , to collect , aggregate , and analyze data , providing not only historical loss data but also estimates of future loss data and future insurer expense data . some maintain that this estimation of future data , known as "trending" raises antitrust concerns similar to those inherent in the creation of final rates . another primary activity of advisory organizations is the creation and filing of insurance policy forms .