the individual must also have standing . cases brought under the religion clauses are governed by general standing rules . standing is the legal term used to indicate that the person has an individualized interest that has actually been harmed under the law or by its application . for instance , a person who has been barred by the government from attending religious services or required by law to attend religious services would have standing because the individual has been individually affected by the government's action . for some establishment clause cases , the court has recognized special exceptions to the general rules for standing . generally , taxpayers do not have standing to sue the government on the grounds that their tax money has been spent in a manner that they consider improper . the court has recognized an exception to this rule , known as the flast exception . under the flast exception , taxpayers may raise establishment clause challenges of actions taken by congress under article i's taxing and spending clause . the court has maintained its narrow interpretation of this exception , refusing to extend it to permit taxpayer lawsuits challenging executive actions or taxpayer lawsuits challenging actions taken under powers other than taxing and spending . the establishment clause provides for separation of church and state , but advocates differ as to the extent to which it requires such separation . some argue that government and religion operate best if each conducts its business independently of the other . others argue that the drafters of the constitution did not intend strict separation , and strict separation has not been practiced throughout american history . for much of the second half of the 20 th century , the court had held that religious interests were to be considered of paramount importance in the constitutional scheme . under this interpretation , any government act that infringed on religious practices of citizens had to serve a compelling state interest . in 1990 , the supreme court significantly altered its interpretation of the free exercise clause . it abandoned the compelling state interest test ( a strict scrutiny standard ) with respect to neutral statutes . the court held that the free exercise clause never "relieve[s] an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability. the constitutional strict scrutiny standard was not abandoned entirely , though . it still applies to cases that involve religious claims for exemption in programs allowing for individualized assessments and cases that involve deliberate governmental targeting of religion . a standard required by the constitution is a baseline , which congress may raise but can never lower . in response to the court's reinterpretation of the standard necessary under the free exercise clause , congress brought back the compelling interest test by statute . congress sought to broaden the legal protection afforded religious exercise with the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) of 1993 , which prohibited government action that has the effect of substantially burdening religious practice .