in their report ( h.rept . 111-380 ) , conferees on the bill recommended an allocation of $97.09 million ( from the overall defense security cooperation agency appropriation ) to serve as a bridge fund while the complex crises fund was put in place . that fund "will enable usaid and the department of sate to meet emergent requirements that fall under their purview without relying on the department of defense," the conferees wrote . in its report accompanying h.r . 110-652 , may 16 , 2008 ) , hasc stated that the committee "reaffirms that the resources provided under this authority are intended to meet immediate , short - term needs. the committee reiterated the concern that had been expressed in the conference report accompanying the original section 1207 legislation ( h.rept . 109-360 , december 15 , 2005 ) that dod should not provide long - term funding in order to enable the department of state to "fulfill its statutory requirements. this concern , according to h.rept . 110-652 , applied to both long - term development programs and to the broader security assistance initiatives "that would be better suited for traditional foreign military financing authorities. in addition to some members of congress , some outside analysts believe that section 1207 activities would have been better funded through the state department and / or usaid . ( dod has never requested that section 1207 be made permanent law , although it did , as mentioned above , request in 2008 that congress extend the authority for five fiscal years. ) while noting the utility of dod section 1207 funding , which enables the u.s. government "to meet critical needs and to take advantage of key opportunities," the usip report mentioned above urges that in the future congress appropriate such quick reaction funding to the state department . "the dod could still participate in deciding on project proposals , but the money would be guaranteed and could be made available more quickly . this would require coordinating the efforts of various congressional committees , but it would restore the traditional role of the dos [department of state] in funding u.s. foreign assistance. in action on the fy2010 defense authorization and appropriations acts , and the fy2010 state department , foreign operations , and related appropriations act , armed services authorizers , defense appropriators , and foreign operations appropriators expressed the sense that the state department should have responsibility for stabilization and reconstruction funding . however , some attributed continued funding under dod to a lack of state department capacity to handle the funding . conferees on the fy2010 ndaa stated that "congress has always intended for this transfer authority to be temporary and are disappointed that the department of state has not yet achieved the capacity to fulfill its statutory requirements . the conferees urge the administration to work toward this goal as rapidly as possible . they further recommend that the administration examine ways to maintain this coordination [between dod and state department] in the absence of this authority" ( h.rept . 111-288 , october 7 , 2009 ) . similarly , in action on their versions of the fy2010 ndaa ( h.r .