each side then yields portions of the 30 minutes to other members . time for debate is either "controlled," or it is not . under controlled time , a member is granted a block of time from a member , called a "manager," who determines for each side which members may speak , for how long , and in what order . it is not in order for a legislator directly to address the "television audience" or the galleries . the manner in which time is obtained , restricted , and distributed in the house depends on the procedures the house is using to consider a measure , as well as the terms of any special order of the house governing the consideration of the measure . there are two different methods by which time to speak on legislation is distributed on the house floor . if time is not controlled , then a member gains time to speak by seeking recognition from the chair , and the length of time the member can speak is usually limited to five minutes . most of the time when members are debating legislation , time is equally divided and controlled by two managers . for example , the house passes bills that enjoy widespread support through the suspension of the rules procedure , which allows for a total of 40 minutes of debate . under that procedure , two managers , generally the chair and ranking member of the committee or subcommittee of jurisdiction ( or their designees ) each control 20 minutes of which they then yield portions to members , usually on their side of the aisle . time for debate of special rules , which set the terms for consideration of most major legislation , is also controlled time ; the first ( and usually only ) hour for debate is granted to the rules committee chair ( or his or her designee ) who in turn customarily yields half of that time to the ranking member of the committee ( or his or her designee ) for purposes of debate only . in addition , when the house resolves into the committee of the whole to consider a bill , the first stage is usually a period for general debate , and this is also controlled time . the chair ( s ) and ranking member ( s ) of the committee ( s ) of jurisdiction typically serve as managers ; if multiple committees have jurisdiction , then managers from each committee control a portion of the time . in some procedural circumstances , debate time is not controlled by floor managers . instead , members gain time to speak by seeking recognition directly from the presiding officer . most prominently , time for debating amendments can take place in the committee of the whole under what is known as the "five minute rule. certain types of special rules , especially those referred to as open rules or modified open rules , normally allow for amendments under the five - minute rule .