fuel purchased from iotc is transported from jordan . the cost of fuel charged by iotc includes shipping into iraq . jassim is paid on a per - truck per - day basis . prices range from $159 - $194 a day , depending on the size of the truck and the type of fuel being transported . the cost of gasoline , diesel , and aviation gasoline originating from turkey also includes shipping costs . jp - 8 originating from turkey is supplied by truck under a separate tender agreement put in place by ictb ( intratheater commercial transportation branch , european command ) . deliveries to the desc during 2007 include the following: from february - december of 2007 , the desc received 430 thousand gallons of avgas from petrol ofisi , 25 million gallons of diesel fuel from golteks , and 3 million gallons of motor gasoline from tefirom . from july - december 2007 , the desc received 190 million gallons of jet a - 1 , 50 million gallons of diesel , and 8 million gallons of motor gasoline from kuwait petroleum corp . in that same time period , the desc also received 80 million gallons of jp - 8 jet fuel , 4.5 million gallons of diesel fuel , 670 thousand gallons of motor gasoline . as previously mentioned , the price the desc pays for fuel destined for iraq does not directly impact how much military units and commands in iraq are paying because desc generally charges a set price to all of its customers worldwide . the price of fuel charged to u.s. military units by desc was raised on july 1 , 2008 , to reflect the increased cost of crude oil . table 5 illustrates the change: desc reports that 81.8% of the fuel used in iraq during fy2007 was jet fuel , 15.8% was diesel , and 2.6% was gasoline . the cost of gasoline in iraq is heavily subsidized by the iraqi government . as such , the price most iraqis pay for fuel is not indicative of the true cost of fuel . as part of an agreement with the international monetary fund , fuel subsidies have been and may continue to be reduced ( see table 6 for current subsidized prices ) . according to one report , the iraqi government reduced its subsidies from $6 billion in 2005 to approximately $2.5 billion in 2007 . it is estimated that the official price for a gallon of regular gasoline in iraq now stands at approximately $1.44 . however , as this price is subsidized by the government , the black market price of gasoline can be almost three times the official price , reportedly hovering around $4.00 a gallon . the black market price of gasoline may be a closer reflection of the true cost of gasoline in iraq than the subsidized government price . comparing the cost of fuels delivered to the centcom area of responsibility and the cost paid by iraq's civilian population is difficult . a number of the fuels used by the u.s. military are generally not used by iraqi civilians .