our training is progressive . as individuals earn new special operations specialties , they are moved to teams or special skills training environments . this training continues until deployment and covers everything from individual skill sets to high - end , advanced , complex unit collective training . in order to assess and certify marine special operations companies for deployment , marsoc has created the raven exercise . he is expected eventually to be sent to new york for criminal prosecution . the fugitive , known as abu anas al - libi , is seen as a potential intelligence gold mine , possessing perhaps two decades of information about al qaeda , from its early days under osama bin laden in sudan to its more scattered elements today . the decision to hold abu anas and question him for intelligence purposes without a lawyer present follows a pattern used successfully by the obama administration with other terrorist suspects , most prominently in the case of ahmed abdulkadir warsame , a former military commander with the somali terrorist group shabab.... "warsame is the model for this guy," one american security official said.... abu anas is being held aboard the u.s.s . san antonio , a vessel brought in specifically for this mission , officials said . a june 27 , 2014 , press report stated the following: right now , a suspected terrorist is sitting in the bowels of a u.s. navy warship somewhere between the mediterranean sea and washington , d.c. ahmed abu khattala , the alleged leader of the september 2012 attack on the u.s. embassy in benghazi , libya , is imprisoned aboard the uss new york , likely in a bare cell normally reserved for u.s. military personnel facing disciplinary action at sea . en route to the united states for more than a week , he's being questioned by military and civilian interrogators looking for critical bits of intelligence before he's read his miranda rights , formally arrested , and transferred to the u.s. district court in washington , where he'll face trial . meanwhile , the sailors aboard are going about the daily business of operating an amphibious transport ship — even as the ship's mission has been redefined by the new passenger in their midst . this isn't the first time the navy has played such a critical , curious , and largely under - reported role in u.s. counterterrorism efforts . in 2011 , ahmed abdulkadir warsame , a military commander for the somali terrorist group al - shabab , was captured aboard a fishing boat in the gulf of aden and detained by the navy , on the high seas , for two months . in 2013 , abu anas al - libi , the alleged mastermind of the 1998 terrorist attacks on american embassies in kenya and tanzania , was held aboard the uss san antonio — an identical ship to the one being used this week . both men were interrogated at sea before being flown to the united states to face criminal charges in federal courts... . in many ways , it's not surprising that the u.s. government has been turning navy assets into floating prisons for these dangerous men .