prior to p.l . 105-17 , the courts of appeals that had considered these issues had sharply divergent views . some courts gave local authorities broad discretion to decide whether to provide services for children with disabilities in private schools which generally resulted in fewer services to such children while others attempted to equalize the costs for public and private school children . the supreme court had granted certiorari in several of these cases but when congress rewrote the law in 1997 , the court vacated and remanded these cases . the idea amendments of 1997 rejected the "equitable participation"standard and provided that to the extent consistent with the number and location of children with disabilities in the state who were enrolled in private schools by their parents , provision was made for the participation of these children in programs assisted by part b by providing them with special education and related services . the amounts expended for these services by an lea were to be equal to a proportionate amount of federal funds made available to the local educational agency under part b of idea . these services could be provided to children with disabilities on the premises of private schools , including parochial , elementary and secondary schools . there was also a requirement that the statutory provisions relating to "child find," identifying children with disabilities , are applicable to children enrolled in private schools , including parochial schools . more changes to these provisions were made by the 2004 reauthorization . the senate report observed that "the intent of these changes is to clarify the responsibilities of leas to ensure that services to these children are provided in a fair and equitable manner. in addition , the senate report stated that "many of the changes reflect current policy enumerated either in existing idea regulations or the no child left behind act. the house report noted that "the bill makes a number of changes to clarify the responsibilities of local educational agencies to children with disabilities who are placed by their parents in private schools . the committee feels that these are important changes that will resolve a number of issues that have been the subject of an increasing amount of contention in the last few years. a child with a disability may be placed in a private school by the lea or the state educational agency ( sea ) as a means of fulfilling the fape requirement for the child . in this situation the cost is paid for by the lea . a child with a disability may also be unilaterally placed in a private school by his or her parents . in this situation , the cost of the private school placement is not paid by the lea unless a hearing officer or a court makes certain findings . however , idea does require some services for children in private schools , even if they are unilaterally placed there by their parents . the 2004 reauthorization includes several changes to the provisions relating to children who are placed in private school by their parents . the provisions relating to children placed in private schools by public agencies were not changed .