inflation is measured as the percent change in a price index . several indices track price changes , with each data series measuring something different . the most commonly cited measure of inflation is the percent change in the consumer price index ( cpi ) . if food prices are no longer volatile , then policymakers may be losing useful information by omitting them . in recent years , headline inflation has typically outpaced core inflation , as seen in figure 1 , because of the rapid rise in energy prices . in 2007 , headline inflation was also driven up by a 3.9% increase in food prices . the difference between core and headline has not always been trivial — from 2003 to 2006 , core inflation was 0.9 percentage points lower than headline . considering that the fed judges 2% inflation to be on the low side and 3% inflation on the high side , the definition used in these years would have arguably strongly colored their policy stance . the difference between core and headline inflation over this period was overwhelmingly the result of energy prices , which rose by an average of 12.8% a year as measured by the cpi . when comparing purchasing power over two time periods , headline inflation is the relevant measure . comparisons over time of wages , wealth , rates of return , government transfers such as social security payments , and so on should all use a headline measure of inflation , because all of these concepts depend on a broad measure of inflation . for example , adjusting household income by core inflation would not be useful since food and energy consumption account for about one - quarter of average household expenditures . similarly , government programs and parts of the tax code that are adjusted for inflation are based on headline inflation . economic growth is also calculated by first adjusting gdp by headline inflation . core inflation is used by policymakers for the reason offered by chairman bernanke in the introduction — policymakers are most concerned about the future path of inflation , and current core inflation data may give better information than current headline data about future headline inflation . headline inflation often does not have good predictive power over short - time periods because food and energy prices are so volatile . for example , the monthly headline inflation rate varied between - 6.3% and 7.5% in 2006 at annualized rates , whereas the core rate varied between 1.2% and 3.6% . policymakers are concerned with future inflation because of lags between a change in policy and its effect on the economy . in essence , it is already too late for policy to influence current inflation , a policy change today can only affect future inflation . theoretically , short - term changes in inflation can be caused by the supply - side or demand - side of the economy . when rising inflation is demand - driven , it means that spending is growing too quickly in the overall economy , and production cannot keep pace . this phenomenon is captured in the famous saying "too much money chasing too few goods.