this apparently is not a requirement in some other wto countries . the eu and the united states also propose eliminating the u.s. requirement that an attorney admitted to the patent bar for the purpose of prosecuting a patent before the uspto must be a u.s. citizen . in addition , there has been consideration of whether disciplines ( wto parlance for certain guidelines ) on domestic regulation in the legal services sector should be adopted and applied . this may be accomplished by negotiation of a discipline specific to legal services or by application of the existing disciplines on domestic regulation in the accountancy sector to legal services . under gats article vi ( 4 ) , disciplines on domestic regulation are developed "[w]ith a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures , technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services. disciplines aim to ensure that requirements are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure quality of service and that licensing procedures are not per se restrictions on the supply of the service . after the accountancy disciplines were developed and adopted , there was active consideration and debate about whether they should be extended to legal services , which the international bar association recommended against . any substantive doha round concessions or any agreement to a legal services discipline by the united states would obligate it , under gats article i ( 3 ) ( a ) , to take reasonable measures to ensure that each of its political subdivisions observes such agreements . this could pose federalism issues , since the rules governing practice in a state are a matter for the highest court of a state or for its legislature and not traditionally a matter for federal legislation or policy . the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) does not make wto commitments with which the united states is not in a position to comply . this is the reason the current schedule of commitments notes obligations in terms of which states have certain requirements , such as in - state residency for licensure . in accordance with ยง102 of the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) , the ustr has consulted with several states concerning the negotiating position of the united states on legal services , apparently to consider what changes these states would be amenable to observing . if the united states were to commit to liberalizing the rules for foreign lawyers or firms to provide legal services in the united states , any related complaint against the united states could be brought only by another wto country and would be resolved through the wto dispute settlement system . an individual foreign attorney or firm could not bring a complaint because disputes can only be brought by one wto country against another wto country . nor could an individual attorney or firm bring a suit domestically for noncompliance with a wto obligation . wto agreements are not self - executing international agreements , so obligations under those agreements must be implemented through domestic legislation or other domestic measures .