it may not award punitive damages . the claimant must consent to arbitration in writing . when a claim involves an alleged breach of a ptpa obligation , the tribunal is to decide the issues in accordance with the ptpa and applicable rules of international law . if the u.s. - peru free trade commission has issued an interpretation of a ptpa provision , as it is authorized to do under article 20.1.3 ( c ) of the ptpa , the decision is binding on the tribunal and any tribunal decision or award must be consistent with the commission decision . a tribunal may only make monetary awards to the claimant and thus may not direct a party to withdraw or modify a disputed measure . an award may consist of monetary damages , restitution of property , or both . chapter ten does not require that an investor , or an investor and an enterprise , exhaust local judicial or administrative remedies before a claim may be filed . the investor may submit a claim under various arbitral mechanisms , including the convention on the settlement of investment disputes ( icsid convention ) and icsid rules of procedure , the icsid additional facility rules , the united nations commission on international trade law ( uncitral ) arbitration rules , or , if the disputants agree , any other arbitration institution or rules . both the united states and peru are parties to the icsid convention and thus investors may avail themselves of the convention and its procedural rules . once an investor claim is filed , a three - member arbitral tribunal will be established . one arbitrator is to be appointed by each disputing party , and the third , the presiding arbitrator , is to be appointed by agreement . if the tribunal has not been constituted within 75 days after the claim is filed , the secretary - general of icsid , if requested , will appoint the outstanding arbitrator or arbitrators . chapter ten contains rules for the conduct of the arbitration , including various provisions aimed at transparency and efficiency of the arbitral proceedings . tribunals may accept and consider amicus submissions from persons or entities that are not disputing parties . tribunals are required to rule expeditiously on any preliminary objections by the defending party that the claim submitted is legally not a claim for which a chapter ten award can be made or that the dispute is not within the competence of the tribunal . as a result , defending parties may obtain an early ruling on a jurisdictional issue , and thus , possible dismissal of the case , and need not necessarily wait for a combined tribunal ruling on panel jurisdiction and the merits of the case . multiple claims with certain common elements may be consolidated . subject to provisions aimed at preventing disclosure of protected information , documents submitted by the parties and tribunal orders , awards and decisions are to be made available to the public . the tribunal must also conduct public hearings . if restitution is awarded , the party is to pay monetary damages and applicable interest in lieu of restitution . the tribunal may also award costs and attorney's fees .