there was some evidence that temporary rebates in the past were not spent . it appears , however , that most of the rebate was spent fairly quickly: at least 20% to 40% in the quarter received and two - thirds by the end of the second quarter after receipt . the checks were mailed out between july and october . the rebate met some important standards for an effective tax cut stimulus . unlike many stimulus proposals in the past , particularly in the 1960s and 1970s , where the stimulus occurred during the recovery rather than the recession phase ( potentially adding to inflationary pressures ) , its impact occurred during the recession . in addition , tax cuts are most effective as a stimulus if they are spent , and the tax reductions affected lower and moderate income taxpayers who have a high propensity to spend . at the same time , there was some concern that lump sum payments might be spent in the same fashions as a continued increase in income through tax reductions . studies of the 2001 rebate also point to the importance of directing the rebate to households with low incomes and with fewer liquid assets . in the study by johnson , parker , and souleles , households with low incomes were estimated to have increased spending by more than the rebate , while middle - income individuals spent less than 20% . households with few liquid assets also increased spending more . another study found that households with lower credit card limits , or who were near their limits , or used their credit cards intensively , increased spending the most . the joint tax committee study discusses some important administrative issues surrounding a cash rebate . following the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , concerns once more arose about the economy . a tax package proposal that included a business tax cut in the form of reduction in the corporate alternative minimum tax and an acceleration of rate reductions failed to achieve passage in 2001 . in 2002 , a bill was adopted and the centerpiece , as far as tax provisions were concerned , was a temporary , two - year , provision for bonus depreciation . this provision , responding to a concern about lagging business investment , allowed businesses to deduct 30% of the cost of most business equipment purchases when incurred rather than depreciating them over several years ( typically five to seven years ) . bonus depreciation was increased to 50% in 2003 and extended through 2004 . among the business tax incentives , a temporary investment subsidy should have the most "bang for the buck. by directing the subsidy at investment , the stimulus does not provide a windfall for existing capital . by making the provision temporary there is an incentive to make investment now rather than later . nevertheless , a study of the effect of temporary expensing by cohen and cummins at the federal reserve board found little evidence that bonus depreciation was effective in stimulating investment . they suggest several potential reasons for a small effect . one possibility is that firms without taxable income could not benefit from the timing advantage .