some of these options could be combined . reduce the possible need for lsis by pursuing separate procurement programs rather than sos programs ; require that certain conditions be met before a private - sector lsi can be used on an acquisition program ( analogous to conditions set for use of the multi - year procurement program ) ; require that lsi arrangements include features to ensure transparency , prevent conflicts of interest , prohibit self - certification , require independent assessments , and facilitate meaningful periodic competitions of the lsi role ; institute additional or stricter reporting requirements for programs being executed by lsis ; require dod and other federal agencies to share lessons learned regarding programs executed with private - sector lsis ; prohibit the use of private - sector lsi's in future acquisition programs ; reduce the possible need for private - sector lsis by building back up the defense civilian and military acquisition workforces , and have dod assume the role of the lsi , and require that dod manage all sos programs ; and implement the recommendations of the recent gansler commission on improving the acquisition workforce . on september 30 , 2010 , the house and senate conferees for the fiscal year 2010 and 2011 coast guard authorization act ( h.r . 3619 ) resolved their differences and the bill was sent to the president on october 4 , 2010 . one provision in the bill , section 564 , would prohibit the use of lead system integrators within the coast guard for all acquisition contracts awarded , task or deliver orders issued after the enactment of this bill , and require the use of full and open competition for any future acquisition contract . this provision was first introduced on march 23 , 2009 in the house as the coast guard acquisition reform act of 2009 . 111-23 , the weapons system acquisition reform act of 2009 , required the secretary of defense to revise the dfars to reflect any organizational conflicts of interest that may arise from the use of private - sector lsis . on january 20 , 2010 , dod published a final rule that both prohibits the use of future lsis and sets the conditions for a limited use of lsi's for certain award of new contracts for lsis . this final rule implements section 802 of the fy2008 national defense authorization act . 110-417 , the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for 2009 , included a provision amending existing public law by clarifying the status of the lead system integrator function for the u.s. army's fcs program . section 112 of the bill provided a provision that clarified the length of time that the contractor can remain the lsi . the provision required the secretary of the army to certify to congressional defense committees when the prime contractor is no longer serving as the lead systems integrator , and notes that any modification to the existing fcs contract , when expressly for the purpose of commencing full - rate production of any major systems or subsystems , shall be considered a new contract . media reports stated that the department of justice is investigating parts of the deepwater program .