title ii of p.l . 480 , administered by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , is the largest u.s. international food aid program . title ii provides humanitarian donations of u.s. agricultural commodities to respond to emergency food needs or to be used in development projects . funds available to title ii of p.l . 480 from both regular and supplemental appropriations have averaged $2 billion annually since enactment of the 2002 farm bill ( 2002-2007 ) . over time , however , other , smaller food aid programs , administered by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , have been authorized by congress — food for progress in 1985 , the bill emerson humanitarian trust in 1998 , and the mcgovern - dole international school feeding and child nutrition program in 2003 . for usda - administered programs , the annual average funding over the 2002 farm bill period has been $356 million . most of the farm bill food aid debate focused on p.l . 480 title ii commodity donations . the 2008 farm bill changes the name of the underlying p.l . 480 legislation from agricultural trade development and assistance act to food for peace act and deletes export market development as one of the objectives of the programs . this modification of objectives is intended to reflect the approach — de - emphasis of export market development for u.s. agricultural commodities and more emphasis on promoting food security — taken in operating the program in recent years . issues addressed included policy objectives , funding levels , availability of food aid resources for non - emergency ( development ) projects , and using local / regional commodity purchases to respond more efficiently and effectively to food crises , among others . the food for progress program ( ffp ) provides commodities to developing countries that have made commitments to expand free enterprise in their agricultural economies . the 2002 farm bill required that a minimum of 400,000 mt be provided under the ffp program . however , not more than $40 million of commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) funds may be used to finance transportation of the commodities . this amount effectively caps the volume of commodities that can be shipped under the program . ( in fy2007 , for example , 342,000 mt were shipped under ffp. ) the 2008 farm bill conference agreement extends the program without change through 2012 , with the requirement that the secretary of agriculture establish a project in malawi under the ffp . the mcgovern - dole food aid program provides commodities and financial and technical assistance to carry out preschool and school food for education programs in developing countries . the program is widely viewed as a model food aid program because of the flexibility with which it provides program components . by executive order of the president , the mcgovern - dole program is administered by the secretary of agriculture . the main issues in congressional debate about the future of the program were the manner and level of funding . some argued for changing the funding from discretionary ( as in current law ) to mandatory and for ramping up funding to $300 million by 2012 .