as mentioned above , h.r . 3996 was passed by both the house of representatives and the senate , though the senate amended the bill to remove this provision . 4351 was passed by the house of representatives and referred to the senate committee on finance on january 22 , 2008 . there are two kinds of partners . the fund managers , who guide the investment strategy , are general partners . their background typically includes experience at a wall street investment bank , although two former secretaries of the treasury and a former securities and exchange commission ( sec ) chairman now run hedge funds . the general partners often invest their own capital in the funds , but this is usually a small share of the total managed by the fund . outside investors , who contribute capital but have no say in investment or management decisions , are the limited partners . they are generally institutional investors — public and corporate pension funds , insurance companies , foundations , and endowments — or individual investors with significant amounts of resources . in addition to deferring u.s. tax as long as the money is held offshore , and not related to the conduct of a trade or business , the returns on the investment can compound tax - free — resulting in a substantial tax advantage . the advantage is such that the new york times reported that a single hedge fund , citadel , has deferred at least $1.7 billion since it was founded in 1990 . in the 110 th congress , h.r . 6049 , all introduced by then committee on ways and means chairman rangel , would have included compensation deferred through foreign - chartered funds in the gross income of the hedge fund manager in the year the income is earned . in contrast to the general partners , the contributions of limited partners is usually a large share of the total managed by the fund . the value of investment services management partnerships is generally viewed as the present value of the future returns from fees and carried interest plus the value of traditional capital assets like stockholdings in companies , real estate , and goodwill ( often referred to as enterprise value ) . hedge funds typically establish multiple funds to accommodate the tax planning preferences of different investors . while they generally share a common pool of underlying assets , they are chartered in different jurisdictions to cater to different clientele . by one estimate , nearly 11,000 hedge funds , or about 80% of the total , are registered in the cayman islands as well as their home country . foreign investors and u.s. tax - exempt institutions may prefer to invest in foreign - chartered funds , while other types of u.s. investors find it disadvantageous to invest in foreign funds . small public investors are generally not able to invest in hedge funds , because they lack either the assets or income . under u.s. law , the sale of shares , or interests , in an investment partnership constitutes an offering of securities , and must be registered with the sec if the offering is public .