section 5 of e.o . 12977 required the isc to develop and evaluate existing security policies and to take necessary actions to enhance the quality of security and protection for federal facilities . these actions might include encouraging agencies with security responsibilities to share security - related intelligence in a timely manner ; evaluating technology and information systems to facilitate cost - effective security upgrades ; developing long - term construction standards for high - risk facilities that require blast - resistant structures or have other specialized security requirements ; evaluating standards for the location and security of day care centers in federal facilities ; and assisting the gsa administrator in creating and maintaining a centralized security database of all federal facilities . while the 1995 vulnerability assessment report provided guidance for overall security standards for existing facilities , it did not provide criteria for the design and construction of new federal buildings . in january 1997 , gsa completed its first draft of a document entitled gsa security criteria , which was revised and issued on october 8 , 1997 , to establish design standards for the protection of federal employees in civilian facilities . the gsa security document attempted to integrate security standards throughout all functional and design phases of the building process , including site and interior space planning , as well as structural and electrical design elements . building upon gsa's 1997 draft security criteria , the members of the isc established a series of working groups that addressed new technology developments , cost considerations , the experience of architects and builders in applying gsa's design criteria , and the need to balance security standards with public access to federal buildings . in may 2001 , the isc issued its security design criteria for new federal office buildings and major modernization projects , based on the five security levels for federal facilities . new isc security requirements for future construction projects included the use of glazing protection for windows , the establishment of distances that buildings should be set back from the street , the control of vehicular access to the buildings , and the location and securing of air intakes . in july 2001 , the isc issued a second product for federal agencies to implement that set forth minimum standards for federal building access procedures . two draft documents , one that addressed entry security technology , and the second , which pertained to preparedness for nuclear , biological , and chemical attacks , were not officially issued by the isc membership . the september 2001 terrorist attacks on the pentagon and the world trade center heightened concerns about the vulnerability of federal buildings to violence or bombing attacks . in response to these events , the isc issued revised procedures to respond to potential vehicle bomb attacks by recommending that new federal buildings be constructed at a minimum distance of between 20 to 50 feet from the nearest perimeter barrier , depending upon the security level . even though the isc successfully completed its security design criteria and related draft documents , a 2002 general accounting office ( gao ) report found that the committee had made "little progress" in other mandated responsibilities .