exemptions for religious organizations in the context of title vii are not absolute . title vii also provides two more specific exemptions . however , the exemption does not allow qualifying organizations to discriminate on any other basis forbidden by title vii . thus , although a religious organization may consider an employee or applicant's religion without violating title vii , the organization may still violate title vii if it considers the individual's race , color , national origin , or sex . furthermore , the exemptions in title vii appear to apply only with respect to employment decisions regarding hiring and firing of employees based on religion . one separate , but similar , exemption applies specifically to religious educational institutions . in other words , religious organizations that decide to hire individuals with other religious beliefs cannot later choose to discriminate against those individuals with regard to wages or other benefits that the organization provides to employees . it is important to note one more exemption relevant to title vii's prohibition on employment discrimination . once an organization qualifies as an entity eligible for title vii exemption , it is permitted to discriminate on the basis of religion in its employment decisions . once an organization makes a decision to employ an individual , the organization may not discriminate on the basis of religion regarding the terms and conditions of employment , including compensation , benefits , privileges , etc . the first amendment of the u.s. constitution protects religious organizations' right to choose spiritual leaders . even before title vii granted a statutory exemption to religious organizations' hiring decisions generally , the u.s. supreme court recognized that the "freedom to select the clergy" has "federal constitutional protection as part of the free exercise of religion against state interference. title vii's nondiscrimination requirements ( eg , prohibitions on discrimination based on sex ) may interfere with this constitutional freedom specific to clergy . this constitutional "ministerial exception" reconciles title vii with the first amendment by allowing religious organizations to select clergy without regard to any of title vii's restrictions yet requiring that employment decisions made regarding other positions within the organization comply with title vii's requirements or exemptions . prior to the supreme court's recognition of the ministerial exception in 2012 , each of the circuit courts also recognized the exception . however , the circuit courts differed on the scope of the exemption , particularly which employees qualified as ministerial employees . the supreme court declined to "adopt a rigid formula for deciding when an employee qualifies as a minister," deciding only the status of the employee in the case before it . although the court did not identify a definitive standard , it considered four factors that may be relevant to determining whether an employee is ministerial: ( 1 ) the formal title given to the employee by the religious institution ; ( 2 ) the substantive actions reflected by the title ( i.e. , the qualifications required to be granted such a title ) ; ( 3 ) the employee's understanding and use of the title ; and ( 4 ) the important religious functions performed by employees holding that title .