u.s. wheat is produced as both a winter and a spring crop . the united states produces all six of the world's major wheat classes—hard red winter ( hrw ) , hard red spring ( hrs ) , soft red winter ( srw ) , hard white , soft white , and durum . inflation concerns were further heightened when the u.s. bureau of labor statistics announced that food prices had jumped by 1.7% during the month of january 2008—the biggest monthly increase in three years . despite the sharp increases in commodity prices in 2007 , most economists agree that fuel costs have played a larger role in food price inflation than have commodity prices . in general , retail food prices are much less volatile than farm - level prices and tend to rise by a fraction of the change in farm prices . this is because the actual farm product represents only a small share of the eventual retail price , whereas transportation , processing , packaging , advertising , handling , and other costs—all vulnerable to higher fuel prices—comprise the majority of the final sales price . hard wheats generally contain higher protein levels—a desirable trait for bread making , while softer wheats may be preferable for making noodles , crackers , and pastries . durum wheat is ground into a coarse flour called semolina that is used for making pastas . in local markets , the demand for a particular wheat class ( and quality ) relative to its nearby supply will determine local prices . price premiums and / or discounts reflecting quality differences often develop and can also influence buyer preferences . other major wheat processors include breakfast food , pet food , and feed manufacturers . as a result , wheat must compete with other cereals for a place at the consumer's dinner table , while also vying with coarse grains and other feedstuffs in livestock feed markets . almost half of the u.s. wheat crop is exported annually , although the importance of exports varies by class of wheat . white wheat and hrs wheat rely more than other wheat classes on sales into export markets . the larger the share of exports to production , the greater the vulnerability to international market forces . in the u.s. domestic market , flour millers are the major users of wheat , milling about 24% of annual wheat production into flour since 2000 . in most cases , a wheat buyer at a flour mill will "source" wheat by general location and primary quality attributes such as protein quantity and quality ( i.e. , gluten share ) and baking performance . wheat may be used directly in feed rations when alternate feedstuffs are lacking or when production - related quality damage makes the wheat unmarketable as a food . wheat milling by - products such as bran , shorts , and middlings are also used by feed manufacturers in the production of animal feeds . the rise in agricultural prices , combined with high oil prices , have contributed to higher food inflation in the united states and around the world . u.s. food prices increased by 4% during 2007 , the highest one - year rise since 1990 .