this could have numerous implications for the u.s. and global economies . over the past few years , china has been one of the fastest growing economies , which has made it a major market for u.s. exports . in 2007 , china surpassed japan to become the 3 rd largest u.s. export market , and thus a chinese slowdown could reduce its demand for u.s. goods and services . additionally , inflationary problems or an economic slowdown could cause chinese officials to delay economic reforms , particularly to its financial system and currency policy . the issues concerning the potential dangers of "hot money" flows to china reinforces the u.s. argument ( and has been acknowledged by the chinese government as a long term goal ) , that china needs to do more to implement policies to encourage domestic demand and lessen its dependence on exporting and fixed investment for its economic growth . some u.s. analysts contend that adopting a free floating exchange rate is the best way to stop hot money inflows and to provide the government with the monetary tools it needs to control inflation . however , chinese officials contend that such a move at this time would shock the economy , especially the export sector , and thus would be too risky ( although they contend that a fully convertible currency is a long range goal ) . most analysts expect the chinese government to continue the rmb's appreciation . the combined effects of the interest rate differences and the expected appreciation of the rmb provide a strong incentive for "hot money" flows into china . li yang , a financial researcher at china's academy for social sciences calculated that "hot money" speculators can obtain profit rates of over 10% per year with little investment risk . in theory , despite its recent capital market liberalizations , china still maintains some restrictions over foreign exchange and international capital flows , providing it with various instruments to prevent the inflow of the unwanted "hot money. however , sources report that speculators are using various methods to circumvent chinese laws and regulations . according to a deutsche bank survey of 200 companies and 60 "high income" individuals , over half of the "hot money" coming into china is being done in the form of over - reported or false foreign direct investment ( fdi ) . an additional 11% of the "hot money" is generated by underreporting the value of imports , and another 10% comes from the overvaluing exports . the deutsche bank study also reported that 5% of the "hot money" enters china via "underground money exchangers" ( dixia qianzhuang ) . employee compensation ( wages sent to china by overseas workers and remuneration paid by chinese enterprises to overseas staff working in china ) and current transfers ( emigrant remittances , gifts , and donations ) may be another major source of hot money . according to some analysts , u.s. economic policies ( and the slow u.s. economy ) may be exacerbating china's "hot money" problem , creating a "catch - 22" situation for beijing .