conversely , in russell , the fiduciary's breach ( i.e . , a delay in processing a benefit claim ) fell outside of these principal duties . the court focused on the idea that the loss was personal to the defendant and was suffered by him alone . while the court acknowledged that the participant's plan account was indeed part of the "entire plan," the court found no basis to interpret the statute in this manner , and claimed that such an interpretation could undermine congress's intent to limit the scope of relief under erisa . given that the plaintiff sought to recover losses only for himself , the participant could not sue under section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) . the supreme court rejected the fourth circuit's decision with respect to section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) , finding that "although â§502 ( a ) ( 2 ) does not provide a remedy for individual injuries distinct from plan injuries , that provision does authorize recovery for fiduciary breaches that impair the value of plan assets in a participant's individual account. the department of labor , writing an amicus brief in larue , had argued for this result . in explaining the holding , justice stevens , writing for the majority , distinguished larue from the russell case in two ways . first , the court explained that the type of fiduciary misconduct occurring in larue violated "principal statutory duties" imposed by erisa that "relate to the proper plan management , administration , and investment of fund assets. second , the court found that in russell , the emphasis placed on protecting the "entire plan" from fiduciary breach under section 409 applies to defined benefit plans , which were the norm at the time of the case . however , as the supreme court noted in larue , defined contribution plans are more popular today , and the "entire plan" language in russell does not apply to these plans . the court explained that for defined benefit plans , fiduciary misconduct would not affect an individual entitlement to a benefit unless the misconduct detrimentally affected the entire plan . by contrast , "for defined contribution plans ... fiduciary misconduct need not threaten the solvency of the entire plan to reduce benefits below the amount that participants would otherwise receive. the court went on to note that "whether a fiduciary breach diminishes plan assets payable to all participants and beneficiaries , or only to persons tied to particular individual accounts , it creates the kinds of harms that concerned the draftsmen of â§409. although all of the justices agreed on the outcome of the larue case , they disagreed as to the reasoning behind it . chief justice roberts , joined by justice kennedy , wrote a concurring opinion suggesting that it is "at least arguable" that a claim such as the one made in larue should be evaluated not as a breach of fiduciary duty claim , but as a claim for benefits brought under section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of erisa .