these cases tend to be complex and require adjudication by the itc . in the case of most copyrights and trademarks , the department of homeland security's customs and border protection ( cbp ) agency , is empowered to make on - the - spot determinations of ipr infringement . in general , u.s. companies must fulfill three requirements in order to assert unfair competition under section 337 . first , there must be an importation or a sale for , sale after , or potential future importation of the infringing product into the united states . it is not necessary for the imports to be in commercial , or mass , quantities . second , an unfair act of competition relating to the imported good must occur , i.e. , an infringement of a valid u.s. patent , copyright , or trademark . for temporary relief proceedings , a final determination ( following an initial determination by the alj ) is granted 90 days after institution for standard cases . for more complex cases , a final determination is granted 150 days after institution of the case . in cases where the complainant receives a temporary remedy , the complainant is required to put up a bond . third , a domestic company must be engaged in sufficient domestic activity , such as investment in plant and equipment or employment of labor and capital , in the united states related to the imported product in question . u.s. citizenship is not necessary to meet this third requirement . the itc grants two primary remedies to u.s. companies: exclusion orders and cease and desist orders . the itc may not issue monetary damages to u.s. companies . the time that it takes for remedies to become enforceable may vary because of differences in target dates and the possibility of appeals by respondents . u.s. companies may request that the itc conduct expedited temporary relief proceedings and issue a temporary exclusion or cease and desist order while the regular investigation takes place . for preliminary relief , u.s. companies must provide significantly more evidence prior to the hearing than for a standard case . section 337 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c . ยง1337 ) is the primary option available to u.s. companies to protect themselves from imports into the united states of goods made by foreign companies that infringe u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , such as patents , trademarks , and copyrights . the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) administers section 337 investigations . the itc is a quasi - judicial federal government agency responsible for investigating and arbitrating complaints of unfair trade practices . the majority of unfair competition acts asserted under section 337 involve allegations of patent infringement . the itc's decision to grant preliminary injunctions is based on: the likelihood of success for the complainant's case and the extent to which the domestic industry , respondents , and the public interest would be adversely affected if a preliminary injunction was not issued . u.s. companies also may bring lawsuits against foreign entities in the venue of u.s. district courts to challenge the entry of infringing products into the united states .