to fail to provide . paratransit [services] . that are sufficient to provide to such individuals a level of service ( 1 ) which is comparable to the level of designated public transportation services provided to individuals without disabilities using such system ; or ( 2 ) in the case of response time , which is comparable , to the extent practicable , to the level of designated public transportation services provided to individuals without disabilities using such system . all public entities operating a "fixed - route system" are subject to the ada's complementary paratransit requirements . the ada defines "fixed - route system" as "a system of providing designated public transportation on which a vehicle is operated along a prescribed route according to a fixed schedule. a public entity is any state or local government , any department or instrumentality of a state or local government , the national railroad passenger corporation , and certain commuter authorities . also , the subcontractors of such public entities are subject to these obligations , even if the subcontractors are private entities . the department of transportation first promulgated regulations to implement the ada's public transportation provisions on september 6 , 1991 . under these regulations , "each public entity operating a fixed route system" ( excluding commuter bus , commuter rail , and intercity rail systems ) must provide "comparable" paratransit service for individuals with disabilities . paratransit service , generally defined , is responsive , accessible origin - to - destination transportation service that is an alternative to a fixed - route system . it is important to note that paratransit requirements do not authorize public entities to supercede the ada's other non - discrimination provisions . although the regulations obligate entities to offer paratransit service , the regulations also forbid entities from requiring their customers with disabilities to utilize the paratransit services instead of the services available to the general public . specifically , transportation entities "shall not , on the basis of disability , deny to any individual with a disability the opportunity to use the entity's transportation service for the general public , if the individual is capable of using that service. furthermore , entities shall not require that individuals with disabilities sit in specific seats or be accompanied by an attendant . the statutory language provides little guidance regarding the required scope of paratransit service . it merely requires entities to offer a level of service that is "comparable" to the level of service offered to the general public . the ada therefore required the department of transportation to develop minimum service criteria to "determine the level of services" sufficient to be "comparable" with services offered to individuals without disabilities . note that the regulations do not prohibit public entities from offering paratransit services that exceed these minimum service requirements . the ada limits its paratransit requirement by waiving the obligation in cases where providing such a service would impose an "undue financial burden" on an entity . the regulations delineate 10 factors for the federal transit administration to consider when determining whether an entity is entitled to an "undue burden" waiver .