amendments to this motion are not in order . the motion to agree to the bicameral compromise with the "new matter" or "new directed spending provision" stricken is debatable "under the same debate limitation as the conference report. under the regular rules of the senate , debate on conference reports is not limited . it is limited only if the senate agrees to limit debate by unanimous consent , if cloture has been successfully invoked on the conference report , or if the senate is considering the report under expedited procedures established by law ( such as the procedures for considering budget resolutions and budget reconciliation measures under the budget act ) . in short , the terms for consideration of the motion to send to the house the proposal without the offending provisions are the same as those that would have applied to the conference report itself . if the senate agrees to the motion , the conference recommendation as altered by the deletion of the "new matter" or "new directed spending provision" would be returned to the house in the form of an amendment between the houses . the house would then have an opportunity to act on the amendment . the points of order under rule xxviii and paragraph 8 of rule xliv can be waived with the support of three - fifths of all senators duly chosen and sworn ( 60 senators if there are no vacancies ) . senators can move to waive points of order against one or several provisions , or they can make one motion to waive all possible points of order under either rule . under these procedures , a motion to waive all points of order is not amendable , but a motion to waive points of order against specific provisions is . as a result , it is possible for a senator to ensure a vote on waiving all points of order under each rule , and , if successful , no separate motions to waive points of order against individual provisions would be necessary . time for debate on the motion to waive is limited to one hour and is divided equally between the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees . if the motion to waive garners the necessary support , the senate is effectively agreeing to keep the matter that is potentially in violation of the rule in the conference report . motions to waive "scope" ( rule xxviii ) points of order are made and considered separately from motions to waive "new directed spending" ( rule xliv , paragraph 8 ) points of order . the rules further require a three - fifths vote to sustain an appeal of the ruling of the chair and limit debate on an appeal to one hour , equally divided between the party leaders or their designees . the purpose of these requirements is to ensure that either method by which the senate could choose to apply these rules — through a motion to waive or through an appeal of the ruling of the chair — requires a three - fifths vote of the senate ( usually 60 senators ) .