specific examples are provided in the regulation of what is prohibited . usually a ceiling is set for overdraft coverage . on may 19 , 2005 , the federal reserve issued a final rule amending its regulation dd to provide consumers with uniform and adequate disclosure information concerning bounced - check or courtesy overdraft protection services . regulation dd implements the truth in savings act ( tisa ) , which requires depository institutions to provide disclosures to enable consumers to make meaningful comparisons of deposit accounts . regulation dd also contains rules for advertising deposit accounts . the board stated that the revisions to regulation dd are consistent with the joint guidance issued previously by board and other regulators . compliance with the amendments to regulation dd became mandatory on july 1 , 2006 . for instance , some institutions did not clearly illustrate all the types of transactions ( atm withdrawals , debit card purchases , and telephone transfers ) besides checks that may be covered by overdraft protections . some marketing practices appeared to encourage consumers to overdraw their accounts by using the service to meet short - term credit needs . some institutions did not clearly distinguish how the bounced - check or courtesy overdraft service differed from a traditional line of credit . other institutions included overdraft protection amounts in the sum they disclosed as the consumer's account "balance" without clearly distinguishing the funds that are available for withdrawal without overdrawing the account . the guidance provided a best practices list to be taken into consideration by institutions with ( or those establishing ) bounced - check / overdraft protection programs . the list was divided into two categories: ( 1 ) marketing and communications with consumers and ( 2 ) program features and operation . included were clear disclosure of program fees and an opt - out feature . the office of thrift supervision added a best practice: to not manipulate transaction clearing rules to inflate fees . the board of governors of the federal reserve system began to study bounced - check and courtesy overdraft services in 2002 to determine the need for regulatory guidance or revisions to board regulations . the board solicited public comment and information on the issues . on february 14 , 2005 , the office of thrift supervision issued guidance separately . on february 18 , 2005 , joint guidance was issued by the office of the comptroller of the currency , the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the federal deposit insurance corporation , and the national credit union administration . the guidance documents reviewed the safety and soundness concerns raised by bounced - check or courtesy overdraft protection services , and stated that institutions should adopt written policies and procedures to address operational and other risks associated with overdraft programs . the joint agency guidance included an overview of legal risks . both guidance documents informed institutions purchasing automated bounced - check protection programs from third - party vendors that a due diligence review should be conducted prior to entering into a contract . both documents stated that clear disclosures and explanations to consumers of the operation , costs , and limitations of an institution's overdraft program are essential .