federal employees enrolled in fers participate in social security . the former spouse of a worker is eligible for a social security spouse's benefit at the age of 62 if the couple were married for at least 10 years , and if the worker is receiving , or is entitled to , social security benefits . if the former spouse of the worker remarries , he or she generally cannot collect benefits on the worker's record unless the marriage ends by death , divorce , or annulment . most civilian federal employees participate in one of two federal retirement systems . in general , employees hired before 1984 are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and those who were hired in 1984 or later are covered by the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) . employees enrolled in csrs do not pay social security taxes and do not earn social security benefits based on their employment in the federal government . a state court decree of divorce , annulment , or legal separation can award a former spouse of a federal employee either a share of the employee's retirement annuity , a survivor annuity , or both types of annuity . to award a former spouse both a share of the employee's retirement annuity and a survivor annuity , the court order must specify both benefits . the office of personnel management ( opm ) will pay only the benefits that are specified in the court order . the divorced spouse of a worker insured by social security can receive widow or widower benefits if the couple were married at least 10 years . survivor benefits terminate if the divorced spouse remarries before the age of 60 unless the later marriage ends , by death , divorce , or annulment . remarriage does not affect social security survivor benefits being paid to the children of a deceased worker . employees enrolled in fers pay social security taxes and earn social security benefits . employees in either system can contribute to the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) , but only employees enrolled in fers receive employer matching contributions . as governmental plans , csrs and fers are not subject to the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ; p.l . 93-406 ) , which governs many aspects of employer - sponsored retirement plans in the private sector . erisa establishes certain rights for the spouses and former spouses of participants in private - sector plans .