the regulation , 12 c.f.r . â§ 7.4006 ( â§ 7.4006 ) , reads , in pertinent part: "unless otherwise provided by federal law or occ regulation , state laws apply to national bank operating subsidiaries to the same extent that those laws apply to the parent national bank. the lower courts have held â§ 7.4006 preempts the application of the michigan mortgage brokers , lenders , and services licensing act , to wachovia mortgage corporation ( "wachovia mortgage" ) , a state - chartered subsidiary of wachovia bank ( wachovia or the bank ) , a national bank . the michigan law requires state registration of mortgage brokers , imposes fees and various standards upon them , and authorizes state regulators to investigate consumer complaints not being pursued by federal regulators . the occ relies primarily on two provisions to promulgate its regulation: 12 u.s.c . â§ 24 seventh ( â§ 24 ) and 12 u.s.c . â§ 484 ( a ) , both of which are part of the national bank act ( nba ) . the commissioner contended that the occ , without adequate statutory authorization , expanded the definition of "national banks" to include "operating subsidiaries. the appellate court , however , deferred to the occ under chevron and held that "incidental powers" included the authority to conduct business through an operating subsidiary , and that the exclusive visitorial powers of national banks trumped any state authority to examine their operating subsidiaries . the court also affirmed the district court's ruling on tenth amendment implications . the supreme court , in a 5-3 decision , ruled that nba preempts state regulation of the mortgage lending activities of national bank operating subsidiaries . the majority opinion was written by justice ginsburg , joined by justices kennedy , souter , breyer , and alito . it holds that: "a national bank has the power to engage in real estate lending through an operating subsidiary , subject to the same terms and conditions that govern the national bank itself ; that power cannot be significantly impaired or impeded by state law. the basic premise of the opinion is that , under the nba's real estate lending and incidental powers clauses , congress gave national banks the power to conduct real estate lending activities in operating subsidiaries and that grants of authority to national banks generally preempt state law . the court relied on the express language of the visitorial powers clause , providing exclusive authority to occ to examine and regulate national banks , as indicative of congressional intent to protect the national banking system from intrusive or inconsistent state laws . it reviewed a long line of cases , beginning with mccullough v. maryland , that have held the federal bank system generally immune to state laws negatively affecting operations . it spoke of federal law as shielding national banks "from unduly burdensome and duplicative regulation" and national banks as being "subject to state laws of general application in their daily business to the extent such laws do not conflict with the letter or the general purposes of the nba. it emphasized that the standard the court applied to preempt state law in barnett bank of marion county , n.a .