nato has other operations as well . nato supports the african union mission in darfur to protect refugees with assistance in training , logistics , and intelligence . the allies have a small training mission inside and outside iraq for that country's military officers . one other mission , active endeavor , is a counter - terror effort in the mediterranean that controls shipping traffic in the search for weapons of mass destruction . at riga , the allies declared the nato response force ( nrf ) fully operational . the nrf has 20,000-25,000 soldiers , supplied on rotation by member governments , in a high - readiness state . germany refused to lift its caveats . nato has operations in other distant theaters that are testing the allies' political will and military capabilities . kfor ( kosovo force ) in kosovo has been in place since 1999 . under a u.n. imprimatur , kfor is charged with maintaining a secure environment , supporting an international civil administration , and controlling ethnic violence . the international community is seeking to resolve kosovo's final status , likely to be a form of independence from serbia , but any solution is unlikely to be fully embraced by the kosovo albanians and the serb minority . in such circumstances , nato forces , now numbering 17,000 , may remain in some form for a period of time . the nrf is an insertion force , able to reach its destination within 5-30 days . one of its key characteristics is flexibility ; nato can create nrf packages sized , for example , for humanitarian assistance , naval operations , or high intensity conflict on land . the allies did not resolve the issue of what types of missions the nrf should engage ; some believe that it should be used only for combat ; others favor such missions as humanitarian assistance . the nrf has brought to the forefront the emerging issue of how to fund nato operations . nato now operates under the principle of "costs lie where they fall," meaning that governments that send troops to an operation pay for their own troops . because spain was leading the nrf on rotation during the pakistani earthquake , madrid bore costs substantially disproportionate to those of other allied governments . the current system of paying for operations is therefore a disincentive for some governments to participate . in addition , some nato members , such as iceland , luxembourg , and belgium , have no or minimal armed forces ; larger states tend to bear much of the burden for operations . the bush administration and several other allies have proposed that all governments bear a proportional cost of operations , and that some equipment be bought and maintained jointly by the alliance . at riga , the allies were unable to agree to common funding for the nrf . in september 2006 , fourteen allies , including the united states , joined to form a "strategic airlift capability" ( sac ) and pledged to buy four large transport planes—the boeing c - 17—in 2007 . nato operations have long been in need of sufficient air transport , and the joint funding effort is a considerable step towards meeting that need .