according to cms , most states do pay for these services . since 1988 , other complicated issues surrounding the relationship between idea , schools and medicaid have arisen . roughly $1.9 billion or 69% of total expenditures was for medicaid benefits provided in schools and about $849 million or 31% was for school - based administration / training activities . there was wide variation in spending patterns across states with respect to the proportion of expenditures for benefits versus administration and training . among the 45 states reporting any school - based spending , 14 had expenditures for benefits only . at the other extreme , six states reported school - based spending for administration and training only . in the president's fy2008 budget proposal , the bush administration noted that medicaid claims for services provided in school settings have been prone to abuse and overpayments , especially with respect to transportation and administrative activities . as of november 2007 , the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) has published reviews of school - based claims in 22 states . based on this and other research , both the hhs oig and gao have reached similar conclusions . for transportation services , examples of inappropriate medicaid billing include ( 1 ) no verification that transportation was in fact provided , ( 2 ) a medicaid - covered school health service other than transportation was not provided on the day that transportation was billed , and ( 3 ) child / family plans did not include a recommendation for transportation services , or there was no iep or ifsp . school districts may perform administrative functions for medicaid purposes , such as outreach , eligibility intake , information and referrals , health service monitoring , and interagency coordination . examples of inappropriate medicaid billing include ( 1 ) payments based on inaccurate time studies used to allocate the cost of these administrative activities across funding sources including medicaid ; ( 2 ) expenditures for school employees who do not perform medicaid administrative activities ; ( 3 ) expenditures for operating costs such as nursing supplies , non - medicaid outreach supplies , and education - related expenditures ; ( 4 ) expenditures for personnel funded by other federal programs ; and ( 5 ) payments for personnel who render only direct medical services . on december 28 , 2007 , the bush administration published a final rule regarding medicaid payments for school - based administration and transportation . first , the rule would restrict federal payments for school - based administrative activities ( eg , outreach , service coordination , referrals ) that may be conducted on behalf of children dually eligible for medicaid and idea , as well as those eligible for medicaid only . second , the rule would restrict federal payments for certain transportation services provided to children dually eligible for medicaid and idea . this rule supercedes prior guidance from cms on these issues , and was estimated to reduce federal medicaid outlays by $635 million in fy2009 and by $3.6 billion over the period fy2009-fy2013 .