the energy firms were not being paid by baghdad . a tentative deal to clear up these disagreements was reached in may 2010 but not implemented . most oil exports through the national grid from the krg area remain suspended . some believe the issue might be resolved when there is a new government , particularly if oil minister shahristani , considered a hardliner against krg control of oil resources , is replaced . the signing of energy deals between the krg and foreign energy firms raises questions about how the krg's resources are used . observers from the region say that many kurds resent the high degree of control of the krg regional economy exercised by the two main kurdish factions . according to these observers , the barzani clan and talabani clan , which control the kdp and puk , respectively , have used their political positions to benefit financially , in turn using their financial clout to solidify political support . some kurds believe there is little opportunity for independent or smaller kurdish families to profit from entrepreneurship , because business and economics are heavily dominated by the barzanis and the talabanis . such allegations appeared to be at the heart of the unexpectedly strong showing of gorran in the july 25 , 2009 , krg elections . although turkey has become substantially less concerned about iraqi kurdish autonomy over the past few years , turkey closely watches and acts against the presence of the turkish kurdish opposition kurdistan workers' party ( pkk ) in krg - controlled territory . the accusation has been leveled particularly at the kdp , whose strongholds border turkey . the pkk — increasingly known by its alias kongra gel ( kgk ) — is named a foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) by the united states ( under the immigration and naturalization act ) . a compromise was later found and the elections were held . in the long debate over the election law needed for the upcoming national elections , kurdish leaders threatened to boycott the elections unless the law was drafted in a way to accommodate kurdish views on the voter eligibility pool . in the latter case , the kurds did obtain some major concessions , for example by agreeing to use the 2009 version of a food rationing list , not a 2005 version , to determine voter eligibility . the 2009 version presumably contains more eligible kurds , because kurds have moved back to northern iraq as time has elapsed since the fall of saddam hussein . with this compromise , the election law was passed november 8 , 2009 , and the elections were held on march 7 , 2010 . despite the kurd - arab tensions in the north , clashes between the pe shmerga and the iraqi security forces ( isf ) were defused with the help of the u.s. military and u.s. diplomats in baghdad . however , the then overall commander of u.s. forces in iraq , gen. raymond odierno , became sufficiently concerned about the tensions that in august 2009 , he unveiled a plan to build confidence between the security forces of the two sides .