like h.r . 1748 is comprehensive legislation intended to address gasoline pricing through a few different avenues , one of which is a prohibition on price gouging . title iii of h.r . 1748 is identical to both title iii of h.r . all three would create the same ban on "unconscionable pricing" during a time of crisis as declared by presidential proclamation . in addition to this , h.r . 1748 also contains language focused on the tax treatment of "major integrated oil companies," as well as language that would bar certain lessees who hold leases that grant exemption from royalties from bidding on new offshore leases until those lessees renegotiate their royalty - exempt leases and language that would direct the sale of petroleum from the strategic petroleum reserve . antitrust laws aim to foster free and unfettered competition on the assumption that such competition will produce the best result for consumers — the lowest and most reasonable prices . in some ways , the antitrust laws could be looked upon as the opposite of price gouging laws , because the antitrust laws seek to remove unreasonable restraints upon trade , allowing market forces to govern , while price gouging laws operate by placing restrictions on prices in certain circumstances effectively placing legal limits or restraints upon trade . however , "price gouging," as noted above , has no singular definition . the term generally refers to the inflation of prices to "unfair" levels in certain circumstances , particularly following natural disasters . it could be argued that activities such as "price gouging" in the oil industry might constitute a restraint on free and fair competition , because prices may be raised to "unreasonable" levels . it is possible that in some circumstances the antitrust laws would prohibit such activity . agreements among competitors to accomplish what is commonly referred to as "price gouging" would most likely violate section 1 of the sherman act ( 15 u.s.c . section 1 prohibits contracts or conspiracies in restraint of trade . that is , section 1 forbids two or more persons or entities from , for example , agreeing to limit output or set prices . while the literal phrasing of section 1 forbids all agreements in restraint of trade , the supreme court has long acknowledged that the statute forbids only unreasonable restraints of trade . as a result , most antitrust cases are examined by courts in light of a variety of factors . in the oil and gas price gouging context , this section might apply , for example , to a group of competitors who agreed to fix prices in the market for gasoline . such a case may be difficult to prove , however . recently , the first circuit court of appeals affirmed a grant of summary judgment for the defendants in a case in which a group of gasoline station owners on martha's vineyard were accused of violating section 1 of the sherman act in the aftermath of hurricane katrina . it was alleged that the gas station owners conspired to raise prices to a level far above prices at the gas stations nearest to the island .