the presiding officer . the clerk will read the bill by title for the first time . the senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: a bill ( s. 1035 ) to extend authority relating to roving surveillance , access to business records , and individual terrorists as agents of foreign powers under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 and for other purposes . mr. mcconnell . i now ask for a second reading and , in order to place the bill on the calendar under the provisions of rule xiv , i object to my own request . the presiding officer . objection having been heard , the bill will be read for the second time on the next legislative day . in the next edition of the senate's calendar of business on april 22 , this action was recorded in the section bills and joint resolutions read the first time . the presiding officer . they may be held at the desk or ordered to be held at the desk , sometimes pending a decision on referring them to committee , passing them without committee consideration , or obtaining clearance from all senators . for example , h.r . 5936 , the west los angeles leasing act of 2016 ( dealing with local veterans administration leases ) , was received in the senate on september 13 , 2016 . although several other bills received from the house that day were referred , no proceedings occurred on h.r . on september 19 , the senate took up and passed h.r . 5936 by unanimous consent . to proceed to consideration , majority leader mcconnell simply stated , i ask unanimous consent that the senate proceed to the immediate consideration of h.r . 5936 , which was received from the house and is at the desk . the bill was passed without debate by voice vote . the senate might even amend a bill that is taken from the desk and considered , as it did with h.r . 6302 , the overtime pay for secret service agents act of 2016 . the pertinent words spoken after there was no objection to the senate's proceeding to consider the bill were: i ask unanimous consent that the johnson substitute amendment be agreed to ; the bill , as amended , be considered read a third time and passed ; the title amendment be agreed to ; and the motion to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table . 6302 , as amended , was passed by unanimous consent . the senate might anticipate passage of a measure by the house , and agree by unanimous consent to senate passage . for example , the senate in the 113 th congress anticipated house passage of a bill that would provide a short - term extension for special iraqi immigrant visas: mr. reid .