there are several ways this could be done . the prohibitory condition could be attached solely to the monies for the particular economic development project involving the condemnation . more broadly , the condition could be applied to a larger pot of money ( eg , community development block grants ) still having some relation to economic development condemnations . most expansively , the condition could be attached to the largest federal funding program one can find ( or all federal funding ) , though this course of action may run afoul of the constitutional requirement that conditions on federal funding must relate to the underlying purpose of the funding . the suggestion has been raised that congress could direct how states exercise their eminent domain authority for economic development projects , regardless of whether federal funds are involved . such legislation , however , arguably might exceed congressional power under the commerce clause and the fourteenth amendment , and may even raise tenth amendment issues . this statute requires compensation of persons who move from real property , voluntarily or by condemnation , due to a federal project or a state or local one receiving federal money . its raison d'etre is that the constitutional promise of just compensation covers only the property taken , leaving the condemnee to bear the often substantial additional losses associated with having to move . some of those losses are compensated under the ura . all this set the stage for kelo . in the late 1990s , connecticut and the city of new london began developing plans to revitalize the city's depressed economy . they fixed on a 90-acre area on the city's waterfront , adjacent to where pfizer inc. was building a $300 million research facility . the intention was to capitalize on the arrival of the pfizer facility . in addition to creating jobs , generating tax revenue , and building momentum for revitalizing the downtown , the plan was also intended to make the city more attractive and create recreation opportunities . the redevelopment would include office and retail space , condos , marinas , and a park . however , nine property owners in the redevelopment area refused to sell , so condemnation proceedings were initiated . in response , the property owners claimed that the condemnations of their properties were not for a public use . in his opinion for the 5-justice majority , justice stevens held that the condemnations , implementing a carefully considered areawide revitalization plan in an economically depressed area , were for a public use , even though the condemned properties would be redeveloped by private entities . the majority opinion noted preliminarily that there was no suggestion of bad faith here—no charge that the redevelopment was really a sweetheart deal with the private entities that would benefit . the case therefore turned on whether the proposed development was a "public use" even though private - to - private transfers with limited public access were involved . without exception , said the majority , the court's cases defining "public use" as "public purpose" reflect a policy of judicial deference to legislative judgments—affording legislatures broad latitude in determining what evolving public needs justify .