as educational attainment increases , the likelihood of unemployment decreases . the benefits of additional years of schooling extend beyond individuals and their families . these societal benefits also are of a pecuniary ( eg , greater economic growth ) and nonpecuniary ( eg , increased civic involvement ) nature . partly because of the spillover of benefits from individuals to society , congress has enacted measures to encourage more of the nation's population to enroll in postsecondary educational institutions ( eg , pell grants , education tax provisions ) . this report focuses specifically on differences over time in selected labor market outcomes of individuals associated with their educational attainment . workers with more education historically have had higher annual earnings on average than workers with less education . college graduates employed full - time year - round throughout their working lives were estimated to earn considerably more , $2.1 million on average . in 2008 , for example , the unemployment rate of workers age 25 and older was 9.0% if they lacked a high school diploma , 5.7% if they were high school graduates , 4.6% if they took some postsecondary courses or obtained an associate degree , and 2.6% if they had at least a bachelor's degree . unlike the previously examined increase over time in the educational wage premium , relative unemployment rates by educational attainment generally have been stable since 1978 . the risk of displacement is lower and the likelihood of reemployment is higher for long - tenured workers with at least a bachelor's degree compared to other workers . workers with a four - year college degree or more were laid off from long - held jobs at a below - average rate from the late 1990s to the mid - 2000s , while the displacement rate of workers with a high school diploma or less usually equaled the average rate . workers with more years of schooling who were displaced from full - time jobs had a higher rate of reemployment in full - time jobs than displaced workers with fewer years of education . for example , 72% of workers with an advanced degree and 63% of workers with a bachelor's degree displaced from full - time jobs in the january 2003 to december 2005 period were reemployed in full - time jobs in january 2006 ; comparable reemployment rates were 57% among displaced high school graduates and 39% among displaced workers who did not enter or complete high school . the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) projects that employment in occupations typically requiring at least a bachelor's degree will increase by 15.3% between 2006 and 2016 , well above the all - occupations average of 10.5% . the nearly five million new jobs estimated to be available to persons with at least a four - year college degree could account for almost one - third of all jobs projected to be added to the economy in the ten - year period . many of the estimated five million new jobs are in professional occupations .