there are at least two perspectives on the significance of the resurgence of economic nationalism . one view , which is more optimistic , interprets the resurgence as a reflection of how far the single market today has advanced , particularly as the blocking of mergers remains one of the few areas left for national authorities to play an interventionist role in a world where markets are increasingly global . a second view , which is more pessimistic , interprets the resurgence as part of larger pressures and developments that have put support for trade liberalization , as well as support for a strong europe , on the defensive . the united states and the eu share a huge and mutually beneficial economic partnership . economic nationalism was never the solution and is even less so today. in the spring of 2006 , the commission initiated a number of actions to counter the rise of economic nationalism . these included a request to the european court of justice to rule on poland's attempt to block an italian lender from acquiring a stake in a polish bank ; a request to the italian government to comply with a june 2005 ruling by the european court on investment in italian energy companies ; a similar request to the spanish government to comply with the court's ruling over similar restrictions on foreign investment in spanish energy companies , and a request to france to justify its 2005 foreign investment decree affecting foreign investment in strategic sectors . in june 2006 french president jacques chirac stated that as a "matter of principle" he was against the proposed merger of the new york and euronext stock exchanges . italy: italian politicians from both major political coalitions advocated blocking french bids for italian companies in retaliation for france's treatment of enel ; and italy's central bank blocked the acquisition of various italian banks by european rivals ; spain: the spanish government is attempting to prevent a hostile takeover of its gas utility endesa sa by the german electricity and gas utility e. on a , and has stated that madrid will do everything in its power to ensure that spain's energy companies remain spanish ; poland: in order to protect the dominant position of a state - owned bank , poland attempted to block the merger of two polish subsidiaries of the italian bank unicredit and the german bank hvb ; luxembourg: together with france , luxembourg endeavored to block mittal , an indian steel maker , from a takeover of the european conglomerate arcelor—a company formed in 2002 from three european firms based in luxembourg , spain , and france ; and germany: the government has clashed with the european commission over 'volkswagen law,' which protects volkswagen from hostile bids . actions that discourage foreign companies from bidding for firms which are regarded as strategic or national champions present the eu with a significant challenge in its efforts to enforce the principle of the free movement of capital . several eu officials have weighed into the public debate to warn about the dangers of resurgent economic nationalism in certain member states .