the presiding officer . the clerk will read the bill by title for the first time . the senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: a bill ( s. 1035 ) to extend authority relating to roving surveillance , access to business records , and individual terrorists as agents of foreign powers under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 and for other purposes . mr. mcconnell . i now ask for a second reading and , in order to place the bill on the calendar under the provisions of rule xiv , i object to my own request . the presiding officer . objection having been heard , the bill will be read for the second time on the next legislative day . mr. president , i understand there is a bill at the desk due for a second reading . the presiding officer . the clerk will read the bill by title for the second time . the legislative clerk read as follows: a bill ( s. 1035 ) to extend authority relating to roving surveillance , access to business records , and individual terrorists as agents of foreign powers under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 and for other purposes . mr. mcconnell . in the next edition of the senate's calendar of business on april 22 , this action was recorded in the section bills and joint resolutions read the first time . the measure was pending at the desk ( of the presiding officer ) . since objection had been heard to the second reading , the presiding officer recognized majority leader mcconnell the next legislative day , april 22: mr. mcconnell . s. 1035 had received its second reading , but there was objection to further proceeding on referral of the bill to committee . the presiding officer , under rule xiv , ordered that the bill be placed on the senate calendar . ( emphasis added . ) therefore , through objection , a bill or joint resolution after two readings is prevented from being referred to committee and is placed directly on the calendar . it is usually the majority leader ( or another senator in his stead ) , acting on his own or at the request of any other senator , who objects to "further proceeding" — committee referral — on a measure . for example , this procedure was used to place s. 1035 directly on the calendar . on april 21 , 2015 , the presiding officer recognized majority leader mcconnell for this colloquy with the chair: mr. mcconnell . mr. president , i understand that there is a bill at the desk , and i ask for its first reading . in order to place the bill on the calendar under the provisions of rule xiv , i object to further proceedings . the president pro tempore . objection having been heard , the bill will be placed on the calendar . in the calendar beginning april 23 , s. 1035 appeared as calendar order no . 60 in the section general orders , with other measures eligible for floor consideration . this same procedure is followed to have house - passed bills and joint resolutions placed directly on the senate calendar .