( italics in the original. ) the senate , like any legislative institution , constantly changes in big and little ways . if the framers returned today to visit the senate , they would surely recognize that it remains the preeminent legislative forum for protecting minority rights and for debating and refining the great issues of the day . they would continue to find that many of their fundamental principles — two senators from each state , the advice and consent role , or the impeachment prerogative — continue to govern the senate's composition and activity . to be sure , they would likely be awe - struck by the country's many changes: the demographic diversity among the 50 states ; the size and reach of the federal establishment ; the rise of presidential power ; the cost of campaigns ; the role of political parties ; the extent of the nation's international obligations ; and numerous other societal , technological , or medical developments . they would soon discover a significant change to their handiwork , however: today's senators no longer are elected by state legislatures . in 1913 the seventeenth amendment to the constitution was ratified providing for the direct election of senators . the framers would probably view this as the most significant constitutional change affecting the senate . the election of senators by state legislatures lasted for more than 125 years until the two institutions that were vested politically in the procedure — the u.s. senate and the state legislatures — opted for the popular election of senators . two words epitomize the fundamental drivers of the change: democracy and deadlock . the direct election of senators was triggered by the progressive movement of the 1890s and early 1900s which advocated an agenda of democratic reform , such as women's suffrage , the direct primary , and the direct election of senators . progressive leaders wanted to end the influence of powerful special interests , especially corporations , over state legislatures ; block the purchase of senate seats ; blunt the influence of party bosses in determining who state lawmakers should select ; and make senators directly answerable to the people for their actions or inactions . for example , the spread of direct primaries in many states "led to voters expressing their choice for senator on the primary ballot . although not legally binding on the legislatures , the popular choice was likely to be accepted. the second major stimulus for the seventeenth amendment involved the often contentious state legislative deadlocks in electing senators . various factors provoked the deadlocks , such as different party control of the two chambers , and lengthy contests among as many as 80 or more senatorial candidates , with balloting extending over several weeks . as a scholar of the senate reported , the "record of senatorial elections for the fifteen years , 1891 to 1905 , shows forty - five such deadlocks — from one to seven in each of twenty states. the combination of these two forces — the democratic impulse and disgruntlement with deadlocks — led to congressional passage of a direct election constitutional amendment in may 1912 . ratification by three - fourths of the state legislatures occurred a year later .