the producer that paid the tax has first claim to any refund . the first was that the export clause was a money - mandating provision , as required for tucker act jurisdiction . the second was that a cause of action founded in a violation of the export clause was self - executing . this meant the clause provided a separate cause of action so that a taxpayer could bring a suit for damages independent of an irc administrative refund claim . in a later case , the court clarified that the export clause was not a money - mandating provision for all parties seeking coal excise tax refunds . an "exporter" would have to establish that it exported coal to a foreign country or shipped it to a u.s. possession , or caused such export or shipment . additionally , the producer or exporter would need to ( 1 ) have filed a return between october 1 , 1990 , and the date of the act's enactment , and ( 2 ) file a claim for the refund within 30 days of the enactment . the treasury secretary would have to determine whether the refund requirements were met within 180 days of a claim being filed and pay any refund owed ( with interest ) within 180 days of that determination . refunds to producers would equal the amount of coal excise tax paid on the exported or shipped coal ( minus any amount paid pursuant to a favorable court judgment mentioned above ) . refunds to exporters would equal $0.825 per ton of exported or shipped coal . refund claims could only be made for coal exported or shipped between october 1 , 1990 , and the date of the act's enactment . no refund would be allowed if one had already been made to any taxpayer or there was a final settlement between the government and producer , party related to the producer , or exporter . the senate bill states it would not give producers or exporters standing to commence or intervene in each other's judicial or administrative refund claim proceedings ; the house bill does not include such a provision . it appears the bills' proposed refund process would have three significant impacts . first , taxpayers would be able to seek refunds for taxes paid in years not open under current law . the supreme court's holding in clintwood elkhorn makes clear that current law requires that a refund claim be filed within three years from the time the excise tax return was filed or two years from the time the tax was paid , whichever is later . the bills would allow refunds relating to coal exported or shipped as early as october 1990 so long as the taxpayer filed a refund claim within 30 days of the provision's enactment and met the other requirements . second , the bills could expand the opportunity for exporters to claim refunds beyond that available under current law , so long as they are able to meet the requirements . third , the bills would impose short time limits for the taxpayers and irs to act on the refund claims .