the majority of va facilities are citi participants . it is important to emphasize that care is delivered based on the availability of space . beneficiaries on medicare or who have an hmo plan as their primary insurance are not eligible for the citi program . under the aca , individuals are required to maintain minimum essential coverage for themselves and their dependents . beginning in 2014 , the aca requires most individuals who do not maintain minimum essential insurance coverage — and do not qualify for an exemption — to potentially pay a penalty for noncompliance . those enrolled in the champva program are considered to have minimum essential coverage and therefore are not subject to the individual mandate penalty when filing their taxes . the penalty is in effect through 2018 ; beginning in 2019 , the penalty will be effectively eliminated ( i.e. , beginning in 2019 , individuals who do not comply with the mandate will not have to pay the penalty ) . if a champva enrollee wishes to purchase additional health care insurance from the health insurance marketplace ( exchanges ) , he or she would not qualify for premium credits and subsidies . as stated in the house report accompanying p.l . 93-82 : the nation has long recognized that the widow and children of a veteran who dies of service - connected disease or injury or of a veteran who has a service - connected total disability are in a special category and deserving of substantial compensation and assistance in return for the sacrifice the family has made . this recognition has been shown in title 38 programs which provide for death compensation benefits , home loans , and educational assistance benefits for wives , widows , and war orphans . failure to provide for the medical care of such individuals is an oversight which should be corrected . champva is fundamentally a health insurance program where certain eligible dependents and survivors of veterans ( veterans rated permanently and totally disabled from a service - connected condition ) obtain medical care from private health care providers . beneficiaries usually pay 25% of the cost of medical care up to an annual catastrophic cap of $3,000 plus an annual outpatient deductible of $50 per individual or $100 per family . champva pays the remaining 75% of the cost of the beneficiaries' medical care . champva was designed to share costs of health services and to provide medical care in a manner similar to the care provided to certain eligible beneficiaries under the department of defense ( dod ) tricare program ( described later in this report ) . the program is administered by the veterans health administration ( vha ) , office of community care , located in denver , co . the number of beneficiaries enrolled in champva has grown over the years . from fy2001 through fy2017 , enrollments grew by 396% — from 96,500 to 478,600 beneficiaries ( see figure 1 ) . the 2001 expansion of champva eligibility to certain individuals aged 65 years and older has contributed somewhat to the increase in enrollment . moreover , there has been an increase in enrollment of dependents and spouses of certain vietnam - era veterans with service - connected disabilities .