, passenger ) vehicles . this compares to roughly 235 million conventional ( mostly gasoline ) light - duty vehicles . further , of the roughly 11.6 million new light - duty vehicles sold in 2009 , only about 400 ( 0.004% ) were ngvs . higher gasoline prices and concerns about u.s. oil dependence have raised interest in ngvs . energy policy proposals such as the pickens plan have further raised interest in these vehicles . however , currently the number of new passenger vehicles capable of operating on natural gas is relatively low , and there are limited opportunities for converting existing gasoline vehicles to run on natural gas . further , domestic output is higher than once thought , mainly due to recent growth in unconventional natural gas sources ( eg , coal mine methane , shale gas ) . new epa regulations on ngv conversions could help promote the expansion of ngvs by lowering the cost of entry for conversion companies . but there are also several potential and measurable drawbacks to ngvs , many related to vehicle performance and acceptability . from a technical feasibility standpoint , there are few problems with converting a vehicle to operate on natural gas . for example , cng engines tend to generate less power for the same size engine than gasoline engines . thus ngvs tend to have slower acceleration and less power climbing hills . in the united states , ngv conversions — or any other fuel conversion — can potentially run afoul of the clean air act ( caa ) . all new vehicles ( gasoline or otherwise ) must pass rigorous tests to prove they will meet emissions standards over the life of the vehicle . these tests tend to be very expensive , although the marginal cost spread over a full product run — thousands to hundreds of thousands of vehicles — is minimal . after a vehicle has been certified by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , any changes to the exhaust , engine , or fuel systems may be considered tampering under the caa . section 203 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) states that it is prohibited for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser , or for any person knowingly to remove or render inoperative any such device or element of design after such sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser . epa generally interprets this to mean that any change to a vehicle's engine or fuel systems that leads to higher pollutant emissions constitutes "tampering" under section 203 . several bills have been introduced in recent years to promote ngvs and ngv infrastructure . most notably in the 112 th congress , the new alternative transportation to give americans solutions act ( nat gas act ) of 2011 ( h.r . 1380 and s. 1863 ) would provide a wide range of incentives .