few developing countries have the needed resources for a challenge . in addition , there is the inherent risk that , if the challenge fails , the effort could legitimize those very programs targeted for discipline . however , in january 2007 , canada requested consultations with the united states under the auspices of the wto ( case ds357 ) to discuss three explicit charges against u.s. farm programs: that corn subsidies have caused serious prejudice to canadian producers in the form of market price suppression ; that the export credit guarantee program operates as an illegal export subsidy ; and that fixed direct payments are not green box compliant and should be counted as amber box payments , putting the united states in violation of its $19.1 billion amber box spending limit in six of the past eight years . based on precedent from wto past decisions , several criteria are important in establishing the existence of adverse effects contributing to serious prejudice: ( 1 ) the subsidies constitute a substantial share of farmer returns or cover a substantial share of production costs ; ( 2 ) the subsidized commodity is important to world markets because it forms a large share of either world production or world trade ; and ( 3 ) there is a causal relationship between the subsidy and adverse effects in the relevant market . a wto challenge , under scm articles 5 and 6.3 , is most likely to focus on those programs that are production - and trade - distorting ( i.e. , amber box ) or that have been exempted from the amber box under the blue box , de minimis , or green box criteria , but can be shown to cause adverse effects in certain markets . to identify commodities that are potentially vulnerable to wto challenges , usda data are used to measure the level of subsidy dependence . then , those commodities identified as depending heavily on government subsidies are evaluated in terms of the potential for the subsidies to be linked to adverse effects in international commodity markets . , remove the linkage between payments and producer or consumer behavior ) . such decoupling would sever the causality linkage necessary to accomplish a successful wto challenge . several options for decoupling have been considered or discussed as part of the ongoing 2007 farm bill debate . these include fully decoupled direct payments , whole - farm revenue - insurance - type programs , and conservation or "green" payments . the attraction of these alternatives is their likely qualification as green box programs . the costs thus would fall outside the wto's aggregate measures of support ( ams ) spending limits . this happens because the united states plays such a large role in world commodity markets . as a result , u.s. subsidy programs would appear vulnerable to wto challenge under scm article 5 and 6.3 following even such a policy reform . this objective was translated into specifics in the administration's 2007 farm bill proposals . nevertheless , some trade specialists argue that numerous new wto challenges of u.s. farm support are unlikely .