such congressional action is not uncommon . for example , the lorance decision , cited as precedent by the ledbetter majority , was subsequently superseded by congress in the civil rights act of 1991 . after the ledbetter decision was handed down , several bills to amend title vii in light of the opinion were introduced in both the 110 th and 111 th congressional sessions . as passed by congress and signed into law by president obama on january 29 , 2009 , the lilly ledbetter fair pay act of 2009 ( h.r . 11 / s. 181 ) clarifies that the time limit for suing employers for pay discrimination begins each time they issue a paycheck and is not limited to the original discriminatory action . this change is applicable not only to title vii of the civil rights act , but also to the age discrimination in employment act ( adea ) , the rehabilitation act of 1973 , and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) . the supreme court granted review to resolve the dispute . ultimately , the supreme court ruled in favor of goodyear , holding that ledbetter's suit was time barred because no unlawfully discriminatory acts had taken place within the 180-day charging period . in rejecting ledbetter's claim on statutory grounds , the court majority relied heavily on the principle that title vii claims alleging disparate treatment require evidence of discriminatory intent . because there was no evidence that goodyear had acted with discriminatory intent when it issued the paychecks ledbetter received during the charging period or when the company had denied her a raise in 1998 , the court found that goodyear had not engaged in an unlawful employment practice during the specified time period . as a result , the fact that ledbetter may have been suffering from the continuing effects of past discrimination was not sufficient for her to establish a claim within the statutorily mandated filing period . in issuing its decision , the ledbetter majority relied on a series of precedents in analogous employment discrimination cases . for example , one such case , united air lines , inc. v. evans , involved a female flight attendant who was not granted seniority when she was rehired despite the fact that she had originally been forced to resign when she got married . although the court agreed that the company's discriminatory policy had a continuing effect , that effect was not sufficient to establish a present violation . similarly , in lorance v. at&t technologies , inc. , the court rejected a challenge to a discriminatory seniority system because the complaint had been filed when the discriminatory effect was felt , rather than within the charging period established by the original discriminatory act , namely the adoption of the seniority system . in light of these and other precedents , the court concluded: the eeoc charging period is triggered when a discrete unlawful practice takes place . a new violation does not occur , and a new charging period does not commence , upon the occurrence of subsequent nondiscriminatory acts that entail adverse effects resulting from the past discrimination .