ussocom was established by congress in 1987 ( p.l . ussocom's stated mission is to plan , direct and execute special operations in the conduct of the war on terrorism in order to disrupt , defeat , and destroy terrorist networks that threaten the united states . the cia was established by the national security act of 1947 ( p.l . 80-253 ) to collect intelligence through human sources and to analyze and disseminate intelligence from all sources . it was also to "perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as the president or the national security council may direct. this opaque phrase was , within a few months , interpreted to include a range of covert activities such as those that had been carried out by the office of strategic services ( oss ) during world war ii . although some observers long maintained that covert actions had no statutory basis , in 1991 the national security act was amended ( by p.l . 102-88 ) to establish specific procedures for approving covert actions and for notifying key members of congress . the statutory definition of covert action ( "activity or activities of the united states government to influence political , economic , or military conditions abroad , where it is intended that the role of the united states government will not be apparent or acknowledged publicly...." ) is broad and can include a wide range of clandestine efforts—from subsidizing foreign journals and political parties to participation in what are essentially military operations . in the case of paramilitary operations , there is a clear potential for overlap with activities that can be carried out by dod . in general , the cia would be designated to conduct operations that are to be wholly covert or disavowable . in practice , responsibilities for paramilitary operations have been assigned by the national security council on a case - by - case basis . recommendation 32 of the 9 / 11 commission report states: "lead responsibility for directing and executing paramilitary operations , whether clandestine or covert , should shift to the defense department . there it should be consolidated with the capabilities for training , direction , and execution of such operations already being developed in the special operations command. the 9 / 11 commission's basis for this recommendation appears to be both performance and cost - based . the report states that the cia did not sufficiently invest in developing a robust capability to conduct paramilitary operations with u.s. personnel prior to 9 / 11 , and instead relied on improperly trained proxies ( foreign personnel under contract ) resulting in an unsatisfactory outcome . the report also states that the united states does not have the money or people to build "two separate capabilities for carrying out secret military operations," and suggests that we should "concentrate responsibility and necessary legal authorities in one entity. some observers question whether procedures are in place to insure overall coordination of effort . press reports concerning an alleged lack of coordination during afghan operations undoubtedly contributed to the 9 / 11 commission's recommendation regarding paramilitary operations . although such accounts have been discounted by some observers , the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l .