these sites include those on installations that are in the process of closing under the 2005 round . the vast majority of sites on brac installations were contaminated with hazardous substances ( i.e. , chemical contaminants ) , but some sites contained abandoned or discarded munitions on former training ranges and munitions disposal facilities . multiple defense appropriations accounts fund this program . two defense base closure accounts fund the cleanup of installations closed under the brac rounds . the "1990" account consolidates funding for the cleanup of installations closed prior to the 2005 round . this account is now entirely devoted to cleanup , as these installations were closed many years ago . the "2005" account funds the cleanup of installations being closed under the 2005 round . most of this account currently funds the actions necessary to close and realign the missions of the installations . as these actions are completed , a greater portion of the 2005 account will be devoted to cleanup to prepare surplus properties for reuse . the cleanup of realigned installations that remain in active use will be funded out of the defense environmental restoration accounts that support cleanup of active installations . see the " estimated costs " section of this report for the amount of funding spent on the cleanup of closed installations over time out of the base closure accounts . to manage cleanup efforts , dod divides each installation into discrete sites ( i.e. , parcels of land ) , based on the nature and boundary of contamination . one installation may contain numerous sites with differing types of contamination . as of the end of fy2007 , dod had identified a total of 5,356 sites on hundreds of installations closed under all five brac rounds where contamination was known or suspected to be present . congress enacted specific authorities for the cleanup of munitions sites in the national defense authorization act for fy2002 ( p.l . see crs report rs22862 , cleanup of u.s. military munitions: authorities , status , and costs , by [author name scrubbed] . dod reported that planned response actions were complete at 70% of the 5,356 sites it had identified through fy2007 . no response was required or expected at 14% of the sites because investigations revealed that the potential for exposure to contamination was within an acceptable range , based on applicable standards . response actions were pending at 10% of the site inventory , with varying stages of progress among individual sites ranging from the assessment phase to the construction of cleanup remedies . evaluations were pending at 6% of the sites , leaving much uncertainty as to the extent of contamination at those locations and the cleanup actions that will be required . sites requiring no further response actions generally have been made available for their intended use . some sites where response actions were not complete also have been made available using early transfer authority , or by leasing the property with ownership retained by the federal government . however , remaining contamination and ongoing cleanup could limit the use of these properties . table 1 presents the status of cleanup through fy2007 at sites on closed military installations by individual brac round .