nspd 51 / hspd 20 does not explicitly specify the appropriate departments and agencies . the directive specifies a "continuity policy coordination committee ( cpcc ) , chaired by a senior director from the homeland security council ( hsc ) staff" appointed by the ncc , and designated as the main day - to - day forum for continuity policy coordination , but also indicates that the ncc will coordinate with the assistant to the president for national security affairs . the directive designates the secretary of homeland security "as the president's lead agent for coordinating overall continuity operations and activities of executive departments and agencies. the directive requires the application of risk management principles "to ensure that appropriate operational readiness decisions are based on the probability of an attack or other incident and its consequences. by mandating planning based on risk analysis , incorporating continuity activities in day - to - day operations , and mandating the utilization of alternate facilities and staffing , the directive appears to incorporate planning assumptions and approaches used widely in the private sector . nspd 51 / hspd 20 designates the president to lead the activities of the federal government for ensuring constitutional government , and designates the assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism as the national continuity coordinator ( ncc ) . in coordination with the assistant to the president for national security affairs , and without exercising directive authority , the ncc coordinates the development and implementation of continuity policy for executive branch departments and agencies . in consultation with the heads of appropriate executive departments and agencies , the ncc was required to lead the development of a national continuity implementation plan for submission to the president . other than explicitly denying the ncc the capacity to exercise directive authority , the extent to which any official charged with continuity coordinating responsibilities can enjoin executive branch agencies to comply with their guidance or recommendations is unclear . nspd 51 / hspd 20 provides that federal executive branch departments and agencies are "assigned to a category in accordance with the nature and characteristics of its national security roles and responsibilities in support" of the nefs . agency leaders are required to execute their respective department or agency coop plans in response to emergencies that affect their operations . in addition , each agency head is required to appoint a senior accountable official , at the assistant secretary level , as the continuity coordinator for the department or agency ; identify and submit to the ncc agency mission essential functions and "develop continuity plans in support of the nefs and the continuation of essential functions under all conditions ; " plan , program , and budget for continuity capabilities ; plan , conduct , and support annual tests and training , to evaluate program readiness and ensure the adequacy and viability of continuity plans and communications systems ; and support other continuity requirements , "in accordance with the nature and characteristics of the agency's national security roles and responsibilities.