it should not be weakened . in the view of varied stakeholders , including the industry , states , and environmental organizations , the court's unanimous decision will not change the way federally licensed hydropower dams operate , because it preserves states' opportunities to require certification that water protection laws will not be violated by the activity of such dams . how the decision might be extended beyond hydropower dams to apply to any federally licensed or permitted activity involving the clean water act is an open question , since the ruling could be applied to projects involving irrigation and water supply systems , where questions of water quality standards also may arise . interestingly , the u.s. supreme court agreed to resolve the s.d . warren co. case in the face of a decades - old acceptance of the role of state water quality certification in federal hydropower licensing , and an absence of any split in the circuits on this point . as we speculated earlier , the court's interest in the case might have been provoked by the important question of federal - state power allocation it raises . buttressing this possibility is the fact that in recent years , the court has accepted a host of cases posing issues of environmental federalism , despite ( in some cases ) the seeming mundaneness of the statutory construction issues involved and / or the lack of a circuit split . examples include decisions under several federal environmental statutes . in the u.s. supreme court , s.d . warren co. prompted the usual prodigious outpouring of amicus briefs one sees in important federalism cases . particularly notable were the brief filed by 34 states and that filed by the united states , each taking the side of maine . indeed , the united states was granted divided argument time in support of maine . parenthetically , the case was argued on february 21 , 2006 , the first day of hearing oral arguments for newly appointed justice samuel alito . the clear - cut nature of the s.d . warren opinion , and its unanimity , suggest that the existence of a state certification prerequisite in connection with ferc hydropower licensing is unlikely to see further litigation . however , whether the scope of that certification authority will see further action in the courts remains to be seen . this is a tale of two statutes . the first is the federal power act , a 1920 enactment , since amended , that establishes "a broad federal role in the development and licensing of hydropower. the act requires a ferc - issued license for the construction , operation , and maintenance of hydropower dams located in any navigable water of the united states . importantly here , the act mandates that ferc include a variety of environmental considerations in its licensing process . ferc's charge to balance the nation's energy needs with environmental considerations is subject to a major constraint: our second statute , the cwa . under the cwa , ferc may not license an activity involving a "discharge" into waters of the united states unless the applicant first obtains a certification or waiver from the state in which the discharge originates .