he claimed that only five remained alive . the japanese public , shocked at the revelations , became fixated on the drama , with attention reaching its height a month later when the five abductees were returned to japan . in may 2004 , koizumi returned to pyongyang to secure the release of five of the abductees' children . coverage of the abductees saturated the press , and the issue quickly became the top priority in japan's north korea policy . given north korea's record of truculence and denial , many analysts expressed surprise that kim jong - il admitted the kidnappings and allowed the abductees and their families to return to japan . however , when tokyo pressed for proof of the remaining abductees' deaths , pyongyang produced apparently forged death certificates and traffic accident reports . when asked for physical evidence , north korean officials provided cremated human remains that most japanese felt to be of dubious origin ( see below ) and also claimed that some remains were washed away in floods . the inconsistency and apparent deception compounded the japanese public's anger at north korea and reinforced the views of many conservative politicians that pyongyang should not be trusted . because of the shaky evidence , tokyo determined that its policy would be based on the premise that all the remaining abductees are alive . as the abductee drama has played out , three japanese prime ministers have navigated the issue in subtly different ways , though always mindful of the emotional reaction of the public . koizumi's bold initiative to visit pyongyang in 2002 brought the issue to the surface , although he may not have anticipated the strong response from the public . koizumi's position toward north korea gradually hardened as the public's criticism of north korea swelled and the bush administration indicated a reluctance to aggressively pursue a negotiated settlement with pyongyang . his successor , shinzo abe , rose to prominence based on his hardline position toward north korea , specifically on the kidnappings . upon taking office , abe established a headquarters in the cabinet secretariat to coordinate abductee affairs ; led efforts to impose international and unilateral sanctions and restrictions when north korea tested missiles and a nuclear device in 2006 ; and called for the immediate return and safety of all the abductees , on the assumption that all were still alive . since assuming the premiership in 2007 , yasuo fukuda has stated his interest in re - engaging more actively in the six - party talks , but has not indicated that he will adjust japan's policy on the abductees . advocacy groups for the abductees note that he has retained the office that abe created , but voice some doubt that his stance will mirror abe's approach . due to the overwhelming public reaction , there has been little open opposition to the official policy on the abductions . opposition political parties have not challenged the ruling party's orthodoxy on the issue , and politicians from all parties have formed special diet committees to indicate their support for the victims .