other bills ( h.r . 3857 ) introduced in the 109 th congress specifically address agricultural labor issues . ( see crs report rl33125 , immigration legislation and issues in the 109th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report 95-712 , the effects on u.s. farm workers of an agricultural guest worker program , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl30395 , farm labor shortages and immigration policy , by [author name scrubbed]. ) hired farmworkers are an important component of agricultural production . many of these laborers are under guest worker programs , which are meant to assure employers ( eg , fruit , vegetable , and horticulture growers ) of an adequate supply of labor when and where it is needed while not adding permanent residents to the u.s. population . the connection between farm labor and immigration policies is a longstanding one , particularly with regard to u.s. employers' use of workers from mexico . the 109 th congress is taking up the issue as part of a larger debate over initiation of a broad - based guest worker program , increased border enforcement , and employer sanctions to curb the flow of unauthorized workers into the united states . house and senate immigration reform measures ( h.r . 4437 and s. 2454 ) currently being debated have important implications for hired farm labor . the full house passed its version of cftc reauthorization ( h.r . 4473 ) on december 14 , 2005 . floor action on a senate - reported measure ( s. 1566 ) is pending . among the issues in the debate are ( 1 ) regulation of energy derivatives markets , where some see excessive price volatility and a lack of effective regulation ; ( 2 ) the market in security futures , or futures contracts based on single stocks , where cumbersome and duplicative regulation is blamed for low trading volumes ; ( 3 ) the regulatory status of foreign futures exchanges selling contracts in the united states ; and ( 4 ) the legality of futures - like contracts based on foreign currency prices offered to retail investors . ( see crs report rs22028 , cftc reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed]. ) the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is an independent federal regulatory agency that regulates the futures trading industry . the cftc is subject to periodic reauthorization ; current authority expired on september 30 , 2005 . congress traditionally uses the reauthorization process to consider amendments to the commodity exchange act ( cea ) , which provides the basis for federal regulation of commodity futures trading . the house and senate agriculture committees , with jurisdiction over cftc , conducted hearings on cftc reauthorization in march 2005 .