( negs are discussed below. ) the governor can reserve not more than 15% of the state's formula grant for state level activities , and not more than 25% for "rapid response" activities . at least 60% must be allocated to local workforce investment boards ( wibs ) by a formula prescribed by the governor . rapid response activities are provided by specialists in the state's dislocated worker unit in the state's workforce agency as soon as possible after learning of a projected permanent closure or mass layoff . activities include establishing onsite contact with employers and employee representatives , providing information and access to available employment and training activities , and providing assistance to the local community in developing a coordinated response and in obtaining access to state economic development assistance . in addition to rapid response activities , there are three levels of services , provided sequentially , available to dislocated workers: core , intensive , and training . to be eligible to receive intensive services , such as comprehensive assessments and development of individual employment plans , an individual must first receive at least one core service , such as job search , and have been unable to either obtain employment or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency . to be eligible to receive training services , such as occupational skills training and on - the - job training , an individual must have received at least one intensive service , and must have been unable to obtain or retain employment . individuals receive these services through a coordinated service delivery system called the "one - stop" system . each one - stop system in a local area must include at least one physical center , which may be supplemented by affiliated sites . in addition to these services , local wibs can decide whether to provide supportive services , such as transportation and child care , and need - related payments . supportive services can be provided to individuals who are participating in core , intensive , or training services , and who are unable to obtain them through other programs . negs , which are funded through the 20% of the dislocated worker appropriation allotted to the national reserve , provide supplemental dislocated worker funds to state workforce agencies and local wibs in order to meet the needs of dislocated workers and communities affected by significant dislocation events that cannot be met with the formula allotments . in its may 24 , 2005 training and guidance letter , dol announced the availability of neg funds for phase i planning grants to states that may be affected by the 2005 brac . the purpose of these grants is to plan a comprehensive response to a brac closure or realignment . states eligible to receive the phase i planning grants are those states listed in the secretary of defense's may 13 , 2005 announcement of installations being recommended for closure or realignment . it is expected that no state will receive phase i planning funds in excess of $1 million . awards will be made in consultation with dod . phase ii grants were made to states to provide employment and training assistance to affected workers , beginning in november 2005 when current brac actions were finalized .