administrations . in his "three no's" statement of june 30 , 1998 , for example , president bill clinton said "... we don't believe that taiwan should be a member of any organization for which statehood is a requirement. some claim that this phraseology is a misinterpretation of the relevant provision in the tra . another such issue concerns the u.s. "one - china" policy formulation . although the united states has never repudiated and in fact has continued forcefully to restate that commitment , purists can argue that the u.s. iterations of the "one china" policy over the years have departed from the original formulation in subtle but significant ways . the first two joint communiqués , below , address the "one china" issue in a similar manner , in contrast to the third communiqué , which injects more nuance into the formulation: "the united states acknowledges that all chinese on either side of the taiwan strait maintain there is but one china and that taiwan is a part of china . the united states government does not challenge that position. – the joint u.s. - china c ommuniqué , shanghai , february 1972 "the government of the united states of america acknowledges the chinese position that there is but one china and taiwan is part of china. – the joint communiqué on the establishment of diplomatic relations between the united states of america and the people's republic of china , january 1 , 1979 "in the joint communiqué [of january 1 , 1979]... the united states of america ...acknowledged the chinese position that there is but one china and taiwan is part of china... . in the years ahead , u.s. officials also are likely to continue to debate the medium and longer - term implications of china's military buildup on the prc - taiwan strategic military balance , particularly as it affects u.s. responsibilities under the tra to assist taiwan's self - defense . the biggest complicating factor for u.s. policymakers today may come from taiwan's own political circumstances , which have changed dramatically since congress passed the 1979 tra . under the authoritarian rule of chiang kai - shek's nationalist party ( also known as the kmt ) , taiwan's political decisions were predictable , closely aligned with u.s. interests , and dependent largely on u.s. support . but several decades of political reforms have made taiwan politics not only more democratic and more nationalistic , but more fluid and harder to predict . given the historical record and with continuing transformations in both the prc and taiwan political systems , u.s. officials may be facing new and more difficult policy choices concerning taiwan in the coming years . while many consider taiwan's continuing democratic maturation , most recently demonstrated by the 2008 presidential election , to be a validation of u.s. goals for the spread of democratic values , that democratization also further emphasizes the unique and delicate challenges for u.s. policy that taiwan poses . the u.s. government continues to embrace the efficacy of the fundamental u.s. policy framework on taiwan — defined by one observer as "one - china , peaceful resolution , u.s. arms sales , the taiwan relations act , and the three communiqués.