u.s. immigration policy has been a point of tension . very few murders are investigated and even fewer are prosecuted . the past two administrations have struggled to get approval of a joint commission , with the united nations , that would investigate clandestine groups working within the government and security forces . the establishment of the international commission against impunity in guatemala , known by its spanish acronym cicig , has been one of president berger's successes . the opposition to cicig came mainly from the guatemalan revolutionary front ( frg ) citing that cicig was a violation of guatemala's sovereignty . both colom and pã©rez molina , as well as their parties , were vocal supporters of the international commission . however , two members of the une , 'lvaro colom's party , voted against cicig in the congressional committee on foreign relations . this was an embarrassment for colom and his party and resulted in the suspension of one of the deputies . on august 16 , a law was passed that formally established cicig for the next two years . cicig has been praised by human rights groups and the international community . concerns persist , however , the guatemalan executive branch will decide which cases will be investigated and the commission will not be able to investigate crimes retroactively , such as war crimes committed during the civil war . the approval of cicig prompted the u.s. house and senate to approve foreign military financing for guatemala in fy2008 , pending department of state certification that certain human rights conditions have been met . both presidential candidates are likely to support continued cooperation with the international community to fight impunity and violence in guatemala . the united states and guatemala have traditionally had close relations . u.s. interest in guatemala lies in consolidating democracy , securing human rights , establishing security , and promoting trade . during that time five political candidates and supporters were killed . among those killed was aura salazar , a close advisor of pã©rez molina . colom's campaign strategist , josã© carlos marroquã­n , resigned in october reportedly due to threats from organized crime groups . prosecuting murders is rare in guatemala , and to date it is not clear who is responsible for many of them or what role , if any , organized crime and drug traffickers played in the campaign violence . impunity and violence are two of the biggest issues facing the new president . guatemala maintains that deportations have added to gang related problems . guatemala has an estimated 1.2 million nationals living in the united states , nearly 60% illegally . they sent back $3.61 billion in remittances in 2006 , equal to 10% of the country's gdp . guatemala has one of the highest murder rates in latin america due to institutional weaknesses and infiltration of security forces by organized crime . president bush visited guatemala in march 2007 to express support for greater cooperation on counternarcotics and youth gangs . the united states' immigration policy has been a growing source of tension since tighter u.s. border security has led to increased deportation of guatemalan nationals .