assets and the poor . sharpe inc. , armonk , new york . march 2005 . sheridan , michael . withdrawals from idas are restricted . funds can be withdrawn to finance specific activities and purchases — generally , education , the purchase of a home , and to start a business . an individual's contributions may also be withdrawn for other purposes , but this leads to the loss of matching funds . in addition to providing matching funds for accounts , ida programs also provide financial literacy education , case management , and supportive services to participants . afi grantees must raise nonfederal funds to operate afi idas . the afi federal grant to an individual grantee cannot exceed the lesser of ( 1 ) the amount of nonfederal resources raised for the program , or ( 2 ) $1 million . temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) is a federal block grant that gives states broad flexibility in the use of its funds in aiding needy families with children . generally , tanf funds ( and required state monies spent under its "maintenance of effort" requirement ) can be used to further any of its statutory goals . in addition , tanf provides specific authority and rules for states to operate ida programs . states may use tanf and state maintenance of effort funds for idas either as an activity that furthers the statute's broad goals , in which case it must conform only to general tanf rules , or under tanf's specific authority to use funds for idas , in which case it must follow tanf's specific ida rules . boshara , ray . individual development accounts: policies to build savings and assets for the poor . this report describes ida programs funded by two major federal grants: the assets for independence ( afi ) act of 1998 and the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program created in the 1996 welfare reform law . other federal initiatives that provide for more targeted idas ( eg , for refugees and for families in assisted housing ) are not discussed in this report . the assets for independence act ( afi , p.l . 105-285 ) authorized up to $25 million per year for fy1999 to 2003 for competitively awarded ida demonstration programs . congress has continued the afi program absent an authorization . the department of health and human service ( hhs ) administers the afi program . table 1 provides a funding history for idas under the afi program . afi is funded at $19 million for fy2014 . brookings institution policy brief , welfare reform and beyond #32 . the exceptions are education and training programs , that seek to build "human capital. more recently , individual development accounts ( idas ) have been developed to help low - income families build financial capital . ida programs are operated by community - based organizations ( including faith - based organizations ) , as well as state and local governments in partnership with community - based organizations . from the participant's viewpoint , idas operate much like retirement 401 ( k ) plans: the participant makes contributions , which are matched ( at varying rates ) by the program .