this report endorsed many but not all of these recommendations . of particular interest , the report states that dod "will continue to ask for congressional authority to change fees and co - pays in an effort to maintain both a generous health care benefit and a fair and reasonable cost - sharing arrangement between beneficiaries and dod. the 2010 budget submitted by the obama administration does not contain legislative proposals to increase tricare fees and the funding levels requested for the defense health program do not assume savings from such proposals . secretary gates recently expressed his concern about the impact of increasing tricare costs on the rest of the dod budget and was quoted as saying "health care is eating the department alive . part of the problem is , we cannot get any relief from the congress in terms of increasing either co - pays or the premiums. the dod fy2010 budget summary justification offers a similar message: military healthcare: the department remains concerned with the cost of providing healthcare to its military forces – active duty and retirees . total healthcare funding included in the fy2010 base budget request is $47.4 billion . projections indicate that military healthcare costs will increase by 5 to 7 percent per year through fy2015 if no changes are made to the current healthcare program fee and benefit structure . this continued growth is largely due to: – increasing use of the healthcare benefit by eligible beneficiaries who previously elected not to use it ; – healthcare inflation and higher utilization of healthcare services ; and – expanded benefits authorized by congress , such as tricare for reservists . as these costs increase , more of the department's budget is likely to be spent on healthcare and less on warfighting capabilities and readiness . other unnamed dod officials have been reported as saying that dod's strategy is to link weapons cuts to health care costs and a need for fee increases: instead of proposing an increase , pentagon officials plan to highlight the cancellation or delay of weapons systems and other large cuts in military spending and make an argument that the inability to hold down soaring health care costs is part of the reason for those cuts . the idea , defense officials said , is that congress may decide on its own that it is time to increase tricare fees , which have not changed since the tricare system was introduced in the mid - 1990s . it remains to be seen how congress will respond to this strategy . the fy2007 , fy2008 , and fy2009 defense authorization acts prohibited dod from increasing premiums , deductibles , co - payments , and other charges through september 30 , 2009 ( see section 704 and 708 of p.l . 109 - 364 , sections 701 and 702 of p.l . 110 - 181 , and sections 701 and 702 of p.l . provisions were also enacted in 2006 ( see section 707 of p.l . 109 - 364 ) to prohibit most civilian employers ( including state and local governments ) from actively encouraging or offering incentives to employees who are retired servicemembers to rely on tricare . the fy2007 national defense authorization ( see section 711 of p.l .