leds are ubiquitous . they are found in computers , radios , televisions , traffic lights , exit signs and holiday lights . however , they have only recently become available for general illumination . manufacturers are developing new types of led bulbs for general lighting and expect rapid cost reductions . although led bulbs are beginning to match cfl and incandescent alternatives in light quality , purchase costs are still an order of magnitude higher . leds produce light in a way that is fundamentally different from incandescent or fluorescent bulbs . leds used for general illumination are expected to be more efficient than cfls in the near future , but remain slightly less so today . leds can produce almost any color light and last about five times longer than cfls . they turn on instantly , contain no mercury , and — because they have no filament or fragile bulb — are not easily damaged by vibration or external shock . but leds are not widely available in general illumination markets . besides high cost , leds can experience problems in cold ( below 15°f ) or hot ( above 120°f ) environments . with light that is highly directional or focused , leds currently seem better for task lighting than for general illumination . some consumers complain that led light is too cold or blue . these issues may be addressed as the technology matures . some consumers complain about the quality of cfl products . they report that cfls generate harsh , unflattering light or that they don't last as long as advertised . some of these objections may be due to experience with earlier bulbs that had poor color temperature rendition or that were used incorrectly . some objections involve personal preference ; cfls may not be appropriate for every lighting application . cfls are now available with a broad range of size , shape , brightness , and color temperature characteristics . consumers have also reported objections to noise and flicker in cfl bulbs . most of these problems have been solved with the introduction of improved electronic ballasts , although some low quality brands may still exhibit these problems . there is concern about mercury in cfl bulbs . used and disposed of properly , cfls can actually reduce mercury in the environment due to the lower demand for coal - fired electricity — which emits that element to the atmosphere . still , the epa recommends special precautions in using and disposing of cfl bulbs . for a more complete discussion of cfls and mercury , see crs report rs22807 , compact fluorescent light bulbs ( cfls ) : issues with use and disposal , by [author name scrubbed] . another concern involves difficulty dimming cfl bulbs . the law does not specify technology winners and losers . rather , the intent of the standard is to draw more efficient light bulbs into the market . manufacturers are introducing advanced incandescent bulbs , such as halogen lamps with special coatings , that meet the standards or are very close to doing so . in october 2007 , philips lighting company introduced the halogená energy saver incandescent bulb series that reportedly meets tier i standards .