, by the end of 1999 ) . at a november 2001 ministerial conference in doha , qatar , the new round of multilateral negotiations — referred to as the doha development agenda ( dda ) or simply the doha round — was initiated . the doha round's work program covers 20 areas of trade , which can be summarized into four broad categories of trade reform: agriculture , non - agriculture market access ( nama ) , rules , and services . member countries are allowed the ability to intervene in national agricultural policy by shifting their support to certain categories that are exempt from restrictions such as the green box . in addition , certain market - distorting programs are exempted from spending disciplines under special circumstances — the blue box contains market - distorting but production - limiting programs , while the de minimis exclusions ( one at the individual product level , the other at the aggregate level ) comprise market - distorting policies that are deemed benign because spending outlays are small relative to a country's overall agricultural sector . in general , wto trade negotiations have emphasized tightening spending limits on the most highly market - distorting domestic programs , while capping and reducing spending under the blue box and de minimis exclusions . green box spending is presently unlimited and would remain so under the current negotiation proposals contained in the draft modalities . however , a special 2008 wto negotiating session failed to narrow the gap on the most contentious issues . the wto categorizes domestic support programs by the degree to which they distort price formation in agricultural markets . a traffic light analogy is used to identify different limits and restrictions for the various program categories based on the severity of distortion . in particular , wto member countries have agreed to specific spending limits on the most highly market - distorting domestic programs — such programs are counted under the aggregate measure of support ( ams ) and placed in the amber box . by early 2008 , substantial progress had been made in the doha round negotiations in narrowing or resolving differences in negotiating positions . a "modalities framework" was released in december 2008 , in an attempt to lock in the status of current negotiated concessions , while adding detail to outstanding issues as a basis for further , more specific talks . as one of the world's largest trading countries — for both agricultural and nonagricultural products — the united states has a major stake in negotiations on trade rules and disciplines . the u.s. congress will continue to seek to influence and monitor ongoing trade agreement negotiations , including multilateral negotiations within the context of the wto , to ensure that u.s. agricultural , food industry , and consumer interests are reflected in their outcomes . the final section of this report briefly summarizes the status of doha round negotiations and activities in 2014 . by early 2008 , substantial progress had been made in the doha round negotiations in narrowing or resolving differences in negotiating positions . however , talks have been deadlocked ( and moribund ) since 2009 , when a wto ministerial conference in geneva failed to resolve differences .