this bill was incorporated into h.r . 3547 , the consolidated appropriations act of 2014 , and signed into law on january 17 , 2014 ( p.l . fy2019 appropriations for cpb were addressed in both the house and senate fy2017 labor - hhs - education bills ( s. 3040 , h.r . 5926 ) ; both the house and the senate approved a $445 million funding level for cpb . however , there is a continuing resolution for fy2017 , p.l . 114-254 , which was signed into law by president obama on december 9 , 2016 . the trump administration has requested zero funding for cpb in fy2018 . on january 30 , 2017 , representative lamborn introduced h.r . 726 ( a bill to prohibit federal funding of national public radio and the use of federal funds to acquire radio content ) and h.r . 727 ( to amend the communications act of 1934 to prohibit federal funding for the corporation for public broadcasting after fiscal year 2019 ) . both bills were referred to the house energy and commerce committee's subcommittee on communications and technology . in an age of multiple cable channel options , digital radio , and computerized digital streaming , some ask whether there is a need for federal appropriations to support public broadcasting . the array of commercial all - news radio and radio talk shows , many of which are also streamed on the internet , provides various sources of news and opinion . supporters of public broadcasting argue that public radio and television broadcasters , free of commercial interruption , provide perhaps the last bastion of balanced and objective information , news , children's education , and entertainment in an era of a changing media landscape . still others contend that public broadcasting has lost much of its early impact since the media choices have grown so much over the last several decades and that the federal role in public broadcasting should be reevaluated as well . supporters of public broadcasting contend that public radio and public television provide education and news to many underserved parts of the american population . public broadcasters may provide this service to an underserved and less commercially attractive population that commercial broadcasters do not address . for example , pbs broadcasting for children includes lessons in reading , counting , and spelling , subjects not normally found on commercial broadcasts . according to npr inc. , approximately 90% of public radio stations provide local newscasts , airing both newscast and non - newscast content ( primarily in weekday drive times and especially during morning drive time ) . about half of all public radio stations carry local news during the weekends , says npr , and 74% of stations are producing and inserting stories into their programming . on june 20 , 2012 , the cpb released a report , alternative sources of funding for public broadcasting stations . the report was undertaken in response to language in the military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations act of 2012 directing the cpb to provide a report to congressional appropriations committees on alternative sources of federal funding for public broadcasting stations .