only authorized users could access the site . the website katrinahealth.org was available for a 90-day period . katrinahealth.org was a completely new , secure online service created in three weeks to help deliver quality care and avoid medical errors . the data contain records from 150 zip codes in areas hit by katrina . at its launch , prescription drug records on over 800,000 people from the region could be searched by health care professionals . the information was compiled and made accessible by private companies , public agencies , and national organizations , including medical software companies ; pharmacy benefit managers ; chain pharmacies ; local , state , and federal agencies ; and a national foundation . the effort to create katrinahealth.org was facilitated by the office of the national coordinator for health information , department of health and human services . with the assistance of federal , state , and local governments , katrinahealth.org was operated by private organizations , such as the markle foundation . the system was only accessible to authorized health care professionals and pharmacists , who provided treatment or supported the provision of treatment to evacuees . to ensure that only authorized physicians used katrinahealth.org , the ama provided physician credentialing and authentication services . the ama validated the identity of health care providers , a key step in ensuring patient confidentiality and security . the national community pharmacists association ( ncpa ) authenticated and provided access for independent pharmacy owners . surescripts provided these services for chain pharmacies on behalf of the national association of chain drug stores ( nacds ) . when treating an evacuee , an authorized user of katrinahealth.org was prompted to enter the evacuee's first name , last name , date of birth , pre - katrina residence zip code and gender . if the evacuee's information was available in katrinahealth.org , the health provider would link to the following information: quantity and day supply ; the pharmacy that filled the script ( if available ) ; the provider that wrote the script ; and drug information , such as indication and dosage , administration and interactions . tools to prevent unauthorized access , and audit logs of system access and records access were maintained and reviewed . the site provided "read only" access and information in the system could not be modified or other wise changed . the developers acknowledged that katrinahealth.org did not contain information on every katrina evacuee from louisiana , mississippi , and alabama ; that the information on each evacuee's prescription history might be incomplete ; and that the data might contain errors or omissions or duplication . users of katrinahealth were encouraged to review the data with the patient . according to the developers , privacy and security concerns were central to the design of katrinahealth.org . highly sensitive personal information was filtered out to comply with state privacy laws . medication information about certain sensitive health care conditions ( hiv / aids , mental health issues , and substance abuse or chemical dependencies ) was not available . health privacy advocates argued that evacuees should have had the option to opt out of the site and that the site should not become permanent .