the effects on individuals can also vary . for example , persons who lose jobs in a closure may not have the kinds of skills needed by the economic activity generated by the redevelopment . individuals may relocate to other regions where the jobs they find may not match the wages of the jobs lost . significant environmental cleanup costs from toxic elements at military installations can delay the transfer of the base to local authorities and limit the kinds of redevelopment options available to a community . in some respects , a closed military base shares similarities with other closed industrial facilities such as steel mills , oil refineries , or port facilities . research and previous economic development experience suggest that converting a closed military base into a source of new competitive advantage is a major community effort . some bases closed in earlier brac rounds have been successfully redeveloped into manufacturing facilities , airports , and research laboratories ( eg, charleston , sc ) . bases also may hold certain advantages for redevelopment that are not shared by other industrial sites . pricing for the closed bases might be steeply discounted and liability for environmental protection indemnified . federal grants and incentives also exist to aid community redevelopment efforts . once a base is slated for closing , consideration of property transfer mechanisms , the extent of environmental cleanup necessary , and a realistic base reuse plan for the transferred property become central elements in organizing the economic development process . establishing a local redevelopment authority ( lra ) with power to assume ownership of the transferred land is a necessary initial step in the economic redevelopment process . the lra must be approved by the dod before property can be transferred . the dod's office of economic adjustment ( oea ) is a resource available to communities seeking assistance in managing the impact of a base closing or realignment . the oea awards planning grants to communities and also provides technical and planning assistance to local redevelopment authorities . by 2002 , a cumulative $1.9 billion in dod and other federal funds had been expended to assist communities affected by base closures . other sources of federal assistance may also be available to assist communities in recovering from a base closure . given the variance in the economic conditions of the local area and the usable facilities left behind , there is no single template for redeveloping a closed military base . one generality that might be applied to almost all cases , however , is that the sooner economic redevelopment can begin after base closure , the better for local communities . base closure can be economically difficult for a community , but closure with a long lag in which the closed base is essentially a hole in the local economy can be worse . while many factors can delay the economic redevelopment of a closed base , the most common may be the need for environmental cleanup of the closed property . except for limited circumstances , property from a closed military base must be cleaned of environmental contamination before being transferred for redevelopment .