regional offices were replaced with area offices . rural delivery carriers — full - time: includes persons who deliver mail in non - urban areas . special delivery messengers: discontinued position that employed persons to make deliveries that required expedited delivery . supervisors / managers: includes persons who supervise other persons or who manage programs or processes . vehicle maintenance personnel: includes persons who perform preventive maintenance and repair of usps vehicles . non - career employees casuals: includes persons hired temporarily to assist usps career employees in mail processing facilities . city carrier assistant: time - limited position created in 2013 that provides the usps with flexibility in hiring for the city delivery function . city carrier assistants may perform the full range of duties undertaken by career city delivery carriers and are entitled to certain employee benefits such as raises , health benefits , and leave . mail handler assistant: time - limited position created in 2013 that provides the usps with flexibility in hiring for the mail delivery function . mail handler assistants may perform the full range of duties undertaken by career mail handlers and are entitled to certain employee benefits such as raises , health benefits , and leave . non - bargaining temporary: includes persons hired temporarily to perform administrative duties in usps offices . postal support employees: time - limited position created in 2011 that provides the usps with flexibility in hiring within the clerk craft and the maintenance and motor vehicle craft . pursuant to a bargaining agreement , postal support employees are entitled to certain employee benefits such as raises , health benefits , and leave . postmaster relief / leave replacements: includes persons who serve temporarily as managers of retail postal facilities . rural subs / rca / rcr / aux: includes rural substitute carriers , rural carrier associates , rural carrier relief carriers , and auxiliary carriers , all of whom provide temporary assistance to usps in the delivery of mail in non - urban areas . transitional employees: includes persons who staff usps's remote encoding centers ( recs ) , which provide assistance concerning mail processing machines . the agency is focusing on consensus building among stakeholders rather than pursuing a specific legislative agenda . career employees area offices personnel: includes persons who work in the usps administrative units that oversee postal operations in usps's nine geographic areas throughout the united states . building and equipment maintenance personnel: includes persons who maintain and repair usps facilities . clerks: includes persons who work directly with the public in usps retail facilities and who manually sort mail . city delivery carriers: includes persons who deliver mail in urban and non - rural areas . headquarters: includes persons who work in a variety of capacities at the two central offices of the u.s . postal service , which are located in washington , dc , and rosslyn , va. headquarters — related field units: includes persons in offices administered from usps's headquarters , but who are located elsewhere . inspection service — field: includes persons who work for the postal inspection service , which protects usps property and employees and investigates alleged misuse of the mails for criminal purposes .