the court relied on both the language and the purpose of the statute to reach this result . in analyzing the statutory language , the court noted that the language of title vii's anti - discrimination provision differs from the language of the retaliation provision "in important ways. under the anti - discrimination provision , the statutory language limits the scope of the provision to actions that affect the terms and conditions of employment , but "[n]o such limiting words appear in the anti - retaliation provision. as the court noted , "we normally presume that , where words differ as they differ here , 'congress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion.' additionally , the court examined the purposes behind the anti - discrimination and retaliation provisions . according to the court , the anti - discrimination provision reflects the primary purpose of title vii , which is to prevent discrimination against certain individuals . the retaliation provision , on the other hand , is designed to ensure that the statute's primary purpose is carried out by preventing an employer from retaliating against employees who report discrimination . relying on this difference in purpose , the court reasoned that congress did not need to prohibit anything more that employment - related conduct in order to achieve the statute's primary purpose of preventing discrimination . however , the court noted that "[a]n employer can effectively retaliate against an employee by taking actions not directly related to his employment or by causing him harm outside the workplace. as examples , the court cited a case in which the fbi retaliated against an employee by refusing to investigate death threats made against the agent and his family , as well as a case in which an employer retaliated by filing false criminal charges against a former employee who had complained of discrimination . therefore , the court reasoned that the purpose behind the retaliation provision would not be served unless the provision encompassed a broader range of conduct than the anti - discrimination provision , noting that "[a] provision limited to employment - related actions would not deter the many forms that effective retaliation can take. given these differences in both the language and purpose of the statute , the court ultimately held that the retaliation provision is not limited to employer actions that affect the terms and conditions of employment . instead , the court established a standard that requires an employee to demonstrate that a reasonable employee would have found the challenged action to be materially adverse . noting that title vii's retaliation provision does not protect an employee from the "petty slights or minor annoyances" of the workplace , the court stated that a challenged action must be significant enough to dissuade the average worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination . the court also emphasized that the context matters when determining whether an employer's action rises to the level of retaliation . for example , "[a] schedule change in an employee's work schedule may make little difference to many workers , but may matter enormously to a young mother with school age children. applying the broader retaliation standard to white's claim , the court upheld the original jury verdict in her favor .