nevertheless , the government remained ambivalent about arrests . belgrade transferred zupljanin to the hague on june 21 . in june 2007 , serbia facilitated the transfer of two fugitive suspects to the hague: former general zdravko tolimir ( a top aide to gen. mladic ) and vlastimir djordjevic , a former serbian police commander . their arrests came shortly after a new serbian government was formed that year and paved the way for forward movement in serbia's negotiations with the eu on an association agreement . in the previous year , two bosnian serb suspects were handed over . from late 2004 to early 2005 , a spate of transfers of mainly bosnian serb indictees took place , many the result of voluntary surrenders negotiated by serbian authorities . in addition , some top former yugoslav army generals surrendered , as did former kosovo prime minister ramush haradinaj . the second remaining fugitive is goran hadzic , former political leader of breakaway serbs in croatia . former croatian general ante gotovina was arrested in late 2005 . with respect to serbia , icty officials have welcomed belgrade's repeated expressed commitment to fulfill its obligations to cooperate with the tribunal , even while they have criticized belgrade's tendency to rely on negotiated surrenders rather than arrests . icty officials warmly welcomed serbia's arrest of stojan zupljanin in june 2008 , which they said confirmed the prosecutor's assertion that the remaining fugitives were "within reach" of belgrade . the surprising arrest of karadzic has elevated expectations that the final remaining indicted war crimes suspects at large may also soon be apprehended . at the same time , many international officials emphasize their expectations of also bringing mladic to justice . serbia's cooperation with icty has been an intermittent sore spot in its foreign relations . in accordance with annual foreign aid legislation , the united states suspended portions of bilateral assistance to serbia over war crimes issues in fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 , and again in may 2007 , affecting a small portion of fy2007 funds ( which was released in july 2007 ) . serbia and montenegro had long been denied entry into partnership for peace , despite having made some significant progress in defense reforms , until the late 2006 nato summit . zupljanin was a security and police commander and aide to wartime bosnian serb leader radovan karadzic . his indictment from 1999 charges him with war crimes and crimes against humanity committed against muslim and croat communities in northwestern bosnia . bosnian serb authorities said they had exchanged information with belgrade that facilitated zupljanin's arrest , which represented the first capture of a major war crimes suspect in about a year . above all , gen. ratko mladic's capture is highly anticipated , although some observers predict that he will not surrender peacefully or allow himself to be captured alive . mladic , as karadzic , is charged with genocide , crimes against humanity , and violations of the laws or customs of war as part of the bosnian serb campaign in 1991 to 1995 to control territory and drive out non - serb populations from srebrenica and other areas .