the transfer of funds has been done each year since fy2003 . the fy2010 transfer was $3.0 million as provided by the department of defense appropriations act ( p.l . the department of education transfers funds to the dod to provide funding for participants in the "troops 2 teachers" program . the program can provide a stipend of up to $5,000 for eligible military personnel to obtain certification as an elementary , secondary , or vocational / technical teacher . the vra is an excepted appointment to a position that is otherwise in the competitive service . after two years of satisfactory service , the veteran may be converted to a career - conditional appointment in the competitive service . once in federal employment , vras are treated like any other competitive service employee and may be promoted , reassigned , or transferred . vra appointees with less than 15 years of education must complete a training program established by the agency . veterans eligible for a vra appointment are disabled veterans ; veterans who served on active duty in the armed forces during a war , or in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized ; veterans who , while serving on active duty in the armed forces , participated in a u.s. military operation for which an armed forces service medal was awarded ; or recently separated veterans . in addition to meeting the criteria above , veterans must have been separated under honorable conditions ( i.e. , the individual must have received either an honorable or general discharge ) . federal agencies can recruit outside their own workforce , to all competitive service employees , in filling permanent competitive service openings . veterans are eligible to apply for this type of open position even if not a current competitive service employee if the veteran is a preference eligible or has completed three or more years of active service . the study is to be transmitted to congress and made publicly available on the internet . the dod secretary is to ensure that each servicemember participating in tap receives an individualized assessment of civilian private sector employment positions for which the servicemember may be qualified based on the servicemember's military skills , training , mos , and the results of the contracted study . the va secretary is required to enter , before november 21 , 2013 , into a contract to provide , at each tap location , the following services to participants: counseling , identifying and applying for employment and training opportunities , assessment of academic preparation for enrollment in education and training programs , and other related or appropriate services ( as identified by the va secretary ) . the va , dod , dol , and homeland security secretaries may enter into contracts with private entities that have experience in assisting members of the armed forces to provide tap instruction on private sector culture ( including resume writing , networking , and job search training ) , academic readiness , and other relevant topics . the dod secretary and the secretary of homeland security may permit a member of the armed forces eligible for the tap program to participate in an apprenticeship program .