one , 18 u.s.c . the crime has three essential elements . first , there must be a proceeding pending before a department or agency of the united states . second , the defendant must be aware of the pending proceeding . third , the defendant must have intentionally endeavored corruptly to influence , obstruct or impede the pending proceeding . section 1505 offenses are not rico or money laundering predicate offenses . conspiracy to obstruct administrative or congressional proceedings may be prosecuted under 18 u.s.c . 371 , and the general aiding and abetting , accessory after the fact , and misprision statutes are likely to apply with equal force in the case of obstruction of an administrative or congressional proceeding . section 371 contains both a general conspiracy prohibition and a specific obstruction conspiracy prohibition in the form of a conspiracy to defraud proscription . the elements of conspiracy to defraud the united states are: ( 1 ) an agreement of two more individuals ; ( 2 ) to defraud the united states ; and ( 3 ) an overt act by one of conspirators in furtherance of the scheme . the fraud covered by the statute reaches any conspiracy for the purpose of impairing , obstructing or defeating the lawful functions of any department of government by deceit , craft or trickery , or at least by means that are dishonest . the scheme may be designed to deprive the united states of money or property , but it need not be so ; a plot calculated to frustrate the functions of a governmental entity will suffice . contempt of congress is punishable by statute and under the inherent powers of congress . congress has not exercised its inherent contempt power for some time . the statutory contempt of congress provision , 2 u.s.c . 192 , outlaws the failure to obey a congressional subpoena or the refusal to answer questioning at a congressional hearing . the offense is punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year and a fine of up to $100,000 . several other federal statutes outlaw use of threats or violence to obstruct federal government activities . 115 , prohibits acts of violence against members of congress , judges , jurors , officials , former officials , and their families in order to impede the performance of their duties or to retaliate for the performance of those duties . it makes assault , kidnapping , murder , and attempts and conspiracies to commit such offenses in violation of the section subject to the penalties imposed for those crimes elsewhere in the code . it makes threats to commit an assault punishable by imprisonment for not more than six years and threats to commit any of the other offenses under the section punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years . another , 18 u.s.c . 1621 the older and more general prohibition that proscribes false swearing in federal official matters ( judicial , legislative , or administrative ) ; and 18 u.s.c . 1114 , protects federal officers and employees as well as those assisting them , from murder , manslaughter , and attempted murder and manslaughter committed during or on account of the performance of their duties .