four schip spa states extended 60 days of postpartum care using schip funds . seven states established upper - income limits at 200% fpl . the highest upper - income eligibility thresholds for pregnant women and / or unborn children under schip was 300% fpl in california . finally , for the family coverage option , pregnancy - related benefits are those offered by participating private health plans . table 1 summarizes the variation in pregnancy coverage among states with ยง1115 waivers and those using the schip unborn child spa option . as of october 2007 , 17 states offered pregnancy - related services using schip funds . of those , 12 states extended coverage through unborn child schip spas and 6 states used the ยง1115 waiver authority ( rhode island extends coverage to pregnant women through both authorities ) . four states exceeded 200% fpl , and six states set maximum income levels below 200% fpl . of the 12 states that offer pregnancy - related services to unborn children under the schip spas , all but tennessee extended coverage to the unborn children of undocumented aliens who otherwise would not have access to federally funded pregnancy - related services , except through emergency medicaid . two states used schip spas to extend coverage to the unborn children of incarcerated women who are otherwise ineligible for schip coverage . covered services under the ยง1115 waiver programs and the schip spas generally consisted of comprehensive pregnancy - related services including prenatal care , labor and delivery services , and access to some form of coverage during the postpartum period . however , the length of coverage ( eg , prenatal period through labor and delivery , or prenatal period through 60 days postpartum period ) and financing streams for the care associated with each of these pregnancy phases varied across states . for example , some states offered coverage from conception through 60 days postpartum care ( financed with schip funds ) , whereas others segmented the coverage to include prenatal care ( financed with schip funds ) , labor and delivery ( financed with emergency medicaid funds ) , and postpartum care ( financed with state - only funds ) . there were 15 states that offered 60 days of postpartum care to at least some of their eligible populations , including each of the 6 states that offered pregnancy coverage under the ยง1115 waiver authority . among the schip spa states , five states financed 60 days of postpartum care with state - only funds . cms permitted this financing arrangement despite the fact that the unborn child regulation clearly states that federal schip - financed care ends with the birth of the child . the reason cms permits this is because the state has a global rate for their pregnancy services that includes the cost of prenatal care , labor and delivery , and 60 days of postpartum care . one schip spa state provided schip - financed postpartum care through the end of the month that the child was delivered because those services have already been paid for under the monthly managed care capitation payment .