the penalty is one of strict liability . the senate passed version of h.r . 2419 contains a section clarifying economic substance . this report analyzes the proposal as contained in the senate amendment . unless otherwise noted , all further references to "the farm bill," " h.r . 2419 ,"or "the current proposal" will be referring to the bill as passed by the senate . the proposed bill provides a definition of "economic substance" for courts to use when they find that the economic substance doctrine is relevant . it makes no claim to clarify when the doctrine is relevant . instead it codifies a definition that settles some differences between courts in terms of what is required to find that a transaction has economic substance . the rationale provided by the court of federal claims in coltec industries v. united states suggests an additional justification for codifying the definition of economic substance ( if not the doctrine itself ) . the court said that , in determining their tax liabilities , taxpayers "must be able to rely on clear and understandable rules established by congress . if federal tax laws are applied in an unpredictable and arbitrary manner , albeit by federal judges for the 'right' reasons . , public confidence in the code and tax enforcement system surely will be further eroded. codifying the definition of economic substance arguably could provide a "clear and understandable rule. there are , however , phrases and concepts in the proposed definition that may be less than clear . if so , they may cause uncertainty rather than providing clarification . some of these are "changes in a meaningful way," "substantial purpose," and substantial profit ( in comparison to tax benefit ) . additionally , since the courts are left to determine when the economic substance doctrine is relevant , there may still be room to apply the codified definition "in an unpredictable and arbitrary manner. the current bill proposes a 30% penalty on the understatement resulting from transactions that lack economic substance if the transaction was not disclosed . some other proposals have set the penalty at 40% . if the transaction is disclosed , the penalty would be reduced to 20% . however , in either case , there is no provision for abating the penalty based on reasonable cause . taxpayer reliance on advice from tax professionals is irrelevant even when that advice is based on substantial authority . arguably , taxpayers have some protection from the penalty because it can only be imposed by the chief counsel or delegate . however , since it is left to the courts to determine whether the economic substance doctrine is relevant , taxpayers are placed in a situation in which they may need professional guidance as to whether the doctrine is applicable , but cannot rely on that guidance to avoid a substantial penalty if a court determines that the doctrine applies and the transaction lacked economic substance .