the scar - l is intended to replace ussocom m4-a1 carbines . all barrels reportedly will take less than five minutes to switch . based on the aforementioned studies and tests , there appears to be not only a wide range of opinions as to the m - 4's reliability and lethality , but also questions if testing of the m - 4 has been consistent and whether performance results are indeed accurate . if the army does opt to replace the m - 4 and the competition involves comparative testing , efforts might be undertaken to ensure consistency between test weapons . as previously noted , the army is basing its upcoming carbine competition to a large extent on the small arms cba , which some believe does not present a compelling case to launch a competition to replace the m - 4 . according to reports , dod — as part of its joint small arms review — is supposed to shortly reach a number of conclusions about the army's small arms cba that might be relevant to any planned m - 4 replacement competition . the results of dod's review might possibly support the army's planned m - 4 replacement competition or instead suggest an alternative course of action . congress might benefit from examining the results of dod's service - wide small arms review as it considers the future of the army's small arms modernization efforts . it has been suggested that ussocom's decision to adopt the fnh scar has implications for the army . in one sense , the scar is the first modular small arms system adopted by the military . the scar - l and scar - h will replace the following weapons: m - 4a1 , mk - 18 close quarter carbine , mk - 11 sniper security rifle , mk - 12 special purpose rifle , and the m - 14 rifle . there is also a 90% parts commonality between the scar - l and scar - h , including a common upper receiver and stock and trigger housing and an enhanced grenade launcher can be attached to either model . while the scar might not meet all of the conventional army's requirements , its adaptability in terms of missions ( close quarters combat to long - range sniper operations ) , being able to rapidly convert from a 5.56 mm to a 7.62 mm weapon , and the ability to accommodate a variety of modifications such as grenade launchers and special optics , might be factors worth considering as the "modular army" plans future small arms programs . the rangers' forthcoming combat deployment with the scar and associated lessons learned and performance and lethality data might also have implications for future army small arms development and acquisition efforts . reliability can be described as "the probability that an item can perform its intended function for a specified interval under stated conditions" and lethality as "the killing or stopping power of a bullet when fired from a weapon. other reports , however , suggest that the m - 4 has performed well and been generally well - received by troops . in ussocom's february 2001 study , a number of m - 4 reliability problems were documented .