in addition , each of the eight agreements has some unique provisions . for the ptpa , unique labor provisions include some new reporting requirements and cooperative and trade - capacity building activities . unemployment and underemployment levels total 64.5% nationwide . peru's labor market is relatively small compared with that of the united states . in 2005 , the labor force of peru comprised nine million workers , compared to 151 million workers in the united states . recorded unemployment in peru was 7.2% and labor cost per hour was $1.48 in 2005 . in comparison , the united states had a recorded unemployment rate of 4.7% and an hourly labor cost of $24.42 . the economic sector in peru with the highest employment is wholesale / retail trade and repair services , followed by manufacturing . during the regime of former president alberto fujimori ( 1990 to 2000 ) , the government implemented a radical economic reform program to control hyperinflation and bring economic stability to the country . part of the program included a wide - ranging privatization plan and a relaxation of foreign investment restrictions to help increase foreign investment . existing labor laws were relaxed significantly during this time . in recent years , however , peru has made much progress in strengthening labor protections by implementing labor law reform and protecting workers' rights . in 2002 , peru ratified the two ilo conventions on the abolition of child labor . in 2003 , the government reduced the number of workers needed to establish a union , eliminated prohibitions on workers that kept them from joining unions during their probationary period , and limited the power of the labor authority to cancel a union's registration . in july 2004 , the government published regulations to strengthen labor inspections and broaden labor inspectors' powers to allow easier access to firms , improved inspectors' ability to impose sanctions , and increase the levels of fines . peru has ratified 71 ilo conventions , including all eight core conventions on workers' rights . the ilo has stated that peru has satisfactorily amended its laws to improve labor standards in certain areas related to freedom of association and protection of the right to organize . however , some critics argue that peru has had some problems in the observance of the ilo core labor standards and that improvements must be made in peru's legislation on collective bargaining . the proposed ptpa was negotiated under the trade promotion authority in the trade act of 2002 ( p.l . 107 - 210 ) as were seven other trade agreements approved by congress: the u.s. - dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , plus agreements with chile , singapore , australia , morocco , bahrain , and oman ; and several agreements that are still pending ( colombia , panama , and south korea. ) while many provisions of the free trade agreements ( ftas ) are similar , the peru tpa was the first to incorporate provisions reflecting the new congressional - administration trade policy . proponents and opponents typically cite the following strengths and weaknesses of the labor provisions of the ptpa .