the following sections discuss these issues . are tobacco taxes the most desirable source of revenue ? compared to other taxes , the incentive effects may be desirable . at the same time , the burden falls heavily on lower income people , which may be of concern . thus , there is a trade - off between the objective of discouraging smoking , and particularly discouraging youth smoking , and the distributional effects of the tax . the remaining issue involves an economic efficiency question relating to arguments that have been made that additional taxes are appropriate to cover costs smokers impose on others . a number of economic studies have questioned that proposition . although taxes on other products are a small part of total tobacco taxes , there has been some controversy about the increases for cigars in 110 th congress proposals and their potential disruption of the industry , as reported in the media . small cigar taxes increase by a factor of 27 . they are apparently viewed by some as substitute for cigarettes who argue they should bear the same tax . small cigars constitute less than 1 / 10 of 1% of cigarette sales . for large cigar taxes , which are currently a maximum of 5 cents , the tax could rise to as much as $10 in the original senate finance committee proposal in the 110 th congress . the ceiling was lowered to $3 on the senate floor in the 2007 legislation and the ceiling in the house bill was $1 in 2007 . 2 has a ceiling of $0.40 , which although much lower is eight times the previous maximum . according to tax data , large cigar sales above the current 5 cents cap ( premium cigars ) account for about half the total . according to the cigar association of america , the average manufacturer's price is about $1.90 for these premium cigars ; the average tax on these cigars would be almost a dollar ( 0.5313 times $1.90 minus $.05 ) in the original 110 th congress senate proposal , but much smaller in the house bill because of lower rate and cap and smaller in the final proposal . most state cigar taxes are based on value and would apply to the federal tax ; they are estimated by the cigar association of america at about 30% . if retail prices are twice the manufacturer's price the price of large cigars under the cap in the original senate proposal would have risen by 20.8% and the price of large cigars over the cap , while varying considerably , would have averaged a 33% increase . prices would rise more if there is also a retailers markup on the tax . the ceiling of $0.4026 would result in much more modest effects . there is less information on the effects of other tobacco products on health or the behavioral response . if the purpose of the tax on cigars is to account for health costs , a per unit rather than a price based tax would seem appropriate . cigars may differ from cigarettes in that a larger share may be likely to be smoked only occasionally and would therefore be less harmful to health .