only the controlled substance authority of 21 u.s.c . 876 clearly extends beyond the power to subpoena records and other documents to encompass testimonial subpoena authority as well . the inspector general act speaks only of subpoenas for records , documents , and the like , and has been held to not include testimonial subpoenas . it also contains no explicit prohibition on disclosure . the language of the inspector general act of 1978 provision is just as general as its controlled substance counterpart: each inspector general , in carrying out the provisions of this act , is authorized to require by subpoena the production of all information necessary in the performance of the functions assigned by this act . its legislative history supplies somewhat clearer evidence of an investigative tool intended for use in both administrative and criminal investigations . the justice department reports that the inspector general's administrative subpoena authority is mainly used in criminal investigations , and the courts have held that the act gives the inspectors general both civil and criminal investigative authority and subpoena powers coextensive with that authority . the act contains no explicit prohibition on disclosure of the existence or specifics of a subpoena issued under this authority . unlike its companions , there can be little doubt that 18 u.s.c . 3486 is intended for use primarily in connection with criminal investigations . it is an amalgam of three relatively recent statutory provisions — one , the original , dealing with health care fraud ; one with child abuse offenses ; and one with threats against the president and others who fall under secret service protection . congress added the final piece to section 3486 in the child protection act of 21012 . there , it vests section 3486's administrative subpoena power in the marshals service for use in tracking unregistered sex offenders . section 3486 is both more explicit and more explicitly protective than either of its controlled substance or ig statutory counterparts . in addition to a judicial enforcement provision , it specifically authorizes motions to quash and ex parte nondisclosure court orders . it affords those served a reasonable period of time to assemble subpoenaed material and respond and in the case of health care investigations the subpoena may call for delivery no more than 500 miles away . in child abuse and presidential investigation cases , however , it imposes no such geographical limitation and it may contemplate the use of "forthwith" subpoenas . the gist of the protection is in the requirement that the disclosure sought shall not be unreasonable . a statute or judicial tolerance , however , may require what the constitution does not . the first of these simply held that the subject of a record subpoenaed from a third party custodian has no standing to move that the administrative subpoena be quashed . the others addressed constitutional challenges , and with one relatively narrow exception agreed that subpoenas in question complied with the demands of the fourth amendment . they cite oklahoma press , powell , and morton salt for the view that administrative subpoenas under section 3486 need not satisfy a probable cause standard .