there are no permit fees . projected compliance costs ( including paperwork requirements ) range from a low of $8.9 million to $23.0 million annually ; they vary based on assumptions of vessel populations affected and the number of instances in which incremental costs will be incurred . unlike s. 2067 and h.r . 2550 , these bills stated that the term "recreational vessel" does not include a vessel that is subject to coast guard inspection and that is "engaged in commercial use" or "carries paying passengers" ( eg , ferries or cruise ships ) . 5949 ( unlike s. 2067 and h.r . 2550 ) would have added provisions concerning management practices for discharges from recreational vessels . as a result of these provisions , while recreational vessels ( as defined in the legislation ) would be exempt from permitting requirements , they could become subject to regulations mandating management practices to control discharges . section 4 of s. 2766 and h.r . 5949 directs epa , in consultation with the coast guard , the department of commerce , and interested states to develop management practices for discharges other than sewage from such vessels . it identifies several factors to be considered by epa , such as the nature and environmental effects of the discharge , the practicability of using a management practice , applicable federal and state laws and international standards , and cost . after developing management practices , epa would be required to promulgate federal standards of performance for each . these standards could distinguish among classes , types , and sizes of recreational vessels , and also between new and existing vessels . the standards could allow for waivers "as necessary or appropriate to a particular class , type , age , or size of vessel. finally , the coast guard would be required to promulgate regulations incorporating the epa standards of performance . after the effective date of these regulations , a recreational vessel could neither operate nor discharge in violation of the regulations . a third approach to the issue was reflected in s. 2645 and h.r . as proposed , one permit ( the recreational general permit , or rgp ) would apply to recreational vessels less than 79 feet in length , an estimated 13 million domestic boats . discharges incidental to the normal operation covered by the draft permit include toxic ( mainly copper from anti - fouling paints and detergents ) and conventional pollutants from deck runoff , bilgewater , non - contact engine coolant and small boat engine wet exhaust , leachate from anti - foulant hull coatings , and fuel tank overflows . the permit would require recreational boat owners to use several management practices intended to minimize or reduce pollutants of concern , such as use of phosphorus - free soap , minimizing the discharge and transfer of visible organisms that could spread invasive species , and managing on - board trash . epa estimated that the maximum national compliance cost would be $88 million , or $26 per boat per year . enactment of s. 2766 eliminated the need for this permit . the second proposed permit ( the vessel general permit , or vgp ) applies to commercial and large recreational vessels .