appendix a . executive summary of july 2012 navy report to congress this appendix reprints the executive summary of the july 2012 navy report to congress on the navy's policies and practices for naming its ships . the text of the executive summary is as follows: executive summary this report is submitted in accordance with section 1014 of p.l . 112-81 , national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2012 , dated 31 december 2011 , which directs the secretary of defense to submit a report on "policies and practices of the navy for naming vessels of the navy. as required by the ndaa , this report: includes a description of the current policies and practices of the navy for naming vessels of the navy , and a description of the extent to which theses policies and practices vary from historical policies and practices of the navy for naming vessels of the navy , and an explanation for such variances ; assesses the feasibility and advisability of establishing fixed policies for the naming of one or more classes of vessels of the navy , and a statement of the policies recommended to apply to each class of vessels recommended to be covered by such fixed policies if the establishment of such fixed policies is considered feasible and advisable ; and identifies any other matter relating to the policies and practices of the navy for naming vessels of the navy that the secretary of defense considers appropriate . after examining the historical record in great detail , this report concludes: current ship naming policies and practices fall well within the historic spectrum of policies and practices for naming vessels of the navy , and are altogether consistent with ship naming customs and traditions . the establishment of fixed policies for the naming of one or more classes of vessels of the navy would be highly inadvisable . there is no objective evidence to suggest that fixed policies would improve navy ship naming policies and practices , which have worked well for over two centuries . in addition , the department of the navy used to routinely publish lists of current type naming rules for battle force ships , and update it as changes were made to them . at some point , this practice fell into disuse , leading to a general lack of knowledge about naming rules . to remedy this problem , the naval history and heritage command will once again develop and publish a list of current type naming rules to help all americans better understand why secretaries of the navy choose the ship names they do . this list will be updated as required . the text of s.con.res . 10 as introduced was as follows: concurrent resolution expressing the sense of congress that the secretary of the navy should name the next nuclear powered submarine of the united states navy the "uss los alamos" .