safety requirements are fairly uniform across most states . they typically require that medications be in their original , unopened sealed packaging or in single unit doses that are individually contained in unopened , tamper - evident packaging . these programs aren't "as simple as returning 'leftovers.' rather , most state legislation typically specifies who may return the unused medication , who may accept the medication , what types of medications may be returned , and to whom the medications may be redistributed . one way to counter this costly practice is to recycle the unused medications . most laws specify who may return , who may accept , and / or who may receive unused medications . some states allow patients to donate , while others restrict the practice to pharmacies , doctors and wholesale distribution centers . iowa , which falls in the former category , allows any person to donate unused medications . in contrast , california law allows donations only from drug manufacturers , licensed health care facilities , and pharmacies . some states do not place restrictions on the drugs included in their recycling program , while others specify the types they will accept . however , the ability to implement recycling programs may be constrained by federal and / or state law . current regulation of pharmaceuticals and those who dispense them consists of a complex system of federal and state laws . there are three federal laws discussed below that may impede the practice of recycling medications . at the state level , state controlled substances laws , pharmacy laws , and other rules promulgated by state boards of pharmacy govern practices relating to the manufacture , distribution , and possession of medicines . nevertheless , state legislatures that have implemented drug recycling programs appear to tailor them to conform to existing regulations . critics argue that insufficient safety controls may lead to adulterated , dangerous medicines , and drugs that land in the wrong hands . state laws vary greatly regarding who may return and accept the medications , which medications may be recycled , and the procedures in place to safeguard against adulteration or unlawful possession of the medications . nevertheless , states seem intent on continuing to tailor their legislation in order to conform to existing law , while simultaneously acting as laboratories to test new cost - effective measures . furthermore , most , if not all , of the drugs in question also require a prescription in order to be dispensed , and therefore are regulated by the federal food , drug , and cosmetics act ( ffdca ) — thus adding another layer of federal statutory regulations . additionally , programs to recycle medications may also encounter logistical problems relating to billing under the health insurance accountability and portability act ( hipaa ) . in recent years , several states have attempted to combat waste associated with discarding unused medications by creating drug recycling programs . this section provides examples of current practices regarding such recycling programs . for example , nebraska restricts its drug repository program to cancer drugs .