tanf imposes some requirements on states with respect to families receiving cash assistance . however , the scope of hurricane katrina's displacement of families , the strain placed on human service agencies responding to this displacement , plus the flexibility allowed states to design programs under tanf , made the block grant a potential source of help to the victims of this disaster . while tanf funding is flexible and provides states with options to help needy families , the legislation passed by congress and signed by the president addressed some policy considerations . tanf block grants are fixed amounts determined by formula in federal law , and absent federal legislation benefits paid by a host state to evacuees would come from that host state's tanf allocation . 109-68 allowed states to draw from the tanf contingency fund to provide 100% federal funding for certain benefits paid to families that evacuated hurricane - damaged areas . funding was capped at 20% per year of the host state's annual block grant . in fy2006 , a total of $48.4 million was drawn from the tanf contingency fund to provide short - term benefits for evacuees . table 2 shows tanf contingency fund grants for evacuees of hurricane - damaged areas . the fixed tanf block grants do not adjust for changes in the circumstances of a state . though tanf did contemplate extra funding in the case of a recession , it has no mechanism to increase funding in the event of a natural disaster . 109-68 provided extra funding for fy2005 and fy2006 for the three hurricane - damaged states of alabama , louisiana , and mississippi , an extra 20% of the damaged state's block grant . tanf recipients who receive ongoing cash assistance are subject to certain requirements , such as time limits and work requirements . 109-68 waived penalties on the states for failure to meet state work requirements as well as the penalty for having more than 20% of its caseload on the rolls for more than five years ( the tanf time limit ) . it also gives the authority to states to provide short - term , nonrecurring benefits for evacuee families receiving benefits in other states and families in hurricane damaged states , to meet subsistence needs and not have that time count for purposes of work requirements or time limits . tanf requires that a specified percentage of its caseload be engaged in work or job preparation activities , limits federally - funded assistance to five years , and requires that cash assistance recipients cooperate with child support enforcement rules ( establish paternity and assign child support to the state ) . tanf also gives authority to states to pay "emergency assistance" benefits . emergency benefits are those that: are considered "nonrecurrent , short - term benefits ; " are designed to deal with a specific crisis situation or episode of need ; are not intended to meet recurrent or ongoing needs ; and will not extend beyond four months . families receiving such emergency benefits are not subject to the same requirements ( i.e , work requirements and time limits ) as are families that receive cash assistance .