a description of the work of each business unit follows . under food services , the subsistence prime vendor program ( spv ) has replaced the former depot stock distribution system with an electronic order and receipt system . through the use of electronic data interchange ( edi ) orders are transmitted and received at the vendor's plants within minutes , allowing for reduced local inventory levels . edi enhances the accuracy and timeliness of orders as well as the quality of the products ; as a result , both the inventory and associated overhead costs are reduced , and the goal for the maximum turnaround time ( from order to delivery ) is 48 hours . according to dla , there are about 50 prime vendors who manage and supply food in regions around the world . the evaluation is conducted by a team of subject matter experts . each technical proposal must demonstrate that the prospective vendor can meet the requirements as set forth in the solicitation , in accordance with "best value" selection criteria . at the conclusion of the evaluation phase , the contract award decision is made and a contract award decision is announced . the contract becomes effective usually between 30 to 60 days after the award announcement . the dod regional manager arranges a post - award conference at the selected vendor's facility , typically within two weeks after the announcement . during the post - award conference , which is jointly conducted by the dla troop services specialist and the vendor , all issues involving the structure and execution of the contract are discussed . at the conclusion of the post - award conference , the installation , vendor , and dla troop services specialist will develop a catalogue of the vendor's product line . this step ensures that all of the items required by the customer are properly coded and contained in the catalogue . the subsistence directorate is divided into the following business units: food services , operational rations , produce , food safety office , and supplier support . the operational rations unit provides the managerial and logistical support for supplying meals for the military , including individual rations , group rations , survival rations , ultra high temperature milk , emergency and sterile drinking water , humanitarian daily rations , and field feeding equipment . while the "meal , ready - to - eat ( mre ) " is the core individual combat ration for the military , the military services also consider the special dietary needs of the soldiers ( including vegetarian and kosher needs ) . the produce unit provides fresh fruits and vegetables to the military services , the defense commissary agency , military exchanges , morale , welfare and recreation facilities , job corps centers , veterans administration hospitals , federal prisons , as well as dod schools and indian reservations . under the produce unit , the dod fresh program is a partnership between the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service , and the produce division , whereby dla troop services buys and distributes fresh fruits and vegetables to schools using the usda's federal commodity entitlement dollars .