section 651 of p.l . 104-208 , the omnibus consolidated appropriations act for fy1997 , authorizes the heads of federal agencies to pay a gratuity payment of up to $10,000 to the executor of the estate of a federal employee who dies as the result of injury sustained in the performance of official duties after august 1 , 1990 . feca benefits are not subject to income taxes . feca cash compensation equals two - thirds of lost earning capacity if the worker has no dependents or three - fourths of lost earning capacity if the worker has dependents . employees cannot donate unused sick leave . when a worker covered by csrs or fers retires , any unused sick leave that he or she has accrued is added to the employee's length of service for purposes of computing the employee's annuity . a federal employee enrolled in csrs is eligible for a disability retirement if he or she has completed at least five years of creditable civilian service ; the employee has a disability that results in deficient performance , conduct , or attendance or that is incompatible with the individual continuing to perform useful and efficient service in his or her job ; a physician certifies that the disability is expected to last a year or more ; the worker's employing agency is unable to accommodate the disability in the worker's current job or in an existing vacant position at the same grade or pay and in the same commuting area ; and an application for disability retirement is filed with the employing agency before separation or with the office of personnel management within one year of the date of separation from employment . unlike the eligibility requirements for benefits under the social security disability insurance income ( ssdi ) and supplemental security ( ssi ) programs , eligibility for a csrs disability retirement annuity does not require the employee to be disabled for any employment in the national economy . instead , to be eligible for a csrs disability retirement annuity , the employee must be unable to perform the job to which he or she was assigned or a job at the same pay in the same commuting area . in such a case , the individual would be eligible to receive a fers disability annuity but be ineligible for ssdi . unless the office of personnel management ( opm ) certifies that the individual's disability is permanent , an employee who has retired due to disability is required to undergo periodic medical reevaluations until the age of 60 . if the individual recovers , disability annuity payments continue temporarily while the individual seeks reemployment . the disability annuity terminates at the earliest of ( 1 ) the date on which the individual is reemployed by the government , ( 2 ) one year from the date of a medical examination showing that the individual has recovered from the illness or disability , or ( 3 ) six months from the end of the calendar year in which the individual demonstrates that his or her earning capacity has been restored .