few developments occurred in early 2008 . as table 1 shows , even with three expired terms , six commissioners remain in office . second , on may 6 , 2008 , president george w. bush made three new nominations to the fec and withdrew mason's re - nomination . commission staff and the remaining two commissioners continued to provide information to the regulated community and to prepare for additional commissioners . in the interim , however , the absence of a quorum at the fec delayed administering aspects of the presidential public financing program , rulemakings , and enforcement actions . immediate issues facing the repopulated commission included rulemaking to implement portions of the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga ) , pending enforcement cases and advisory opinion requests , and administering the presidential public campaign financing program . the commission also needed to respond to ongoing litigation surrounding the bipartisan campaign reform act . during 2009 , the commission continued to work through these and other issues that arose before , during , and after the shutdown . the loss of a policymaking quorum would not occur again unless fewer than four commissioners were in office . nonetheless , the 2008 "shutdown" may continue to be of interest to the 111 th congressional consideration of oversight or appropriations issues . however , additional nomination activity took place beginning in april . first , lenhard requested that his nomination be withdrawn . donald f. mcgahn ii ( r ) , an election lawyer , was nominated to the mason seat . at the same time , the president withdrew lenhard's name and nominated cynthia l. bauerly ( d ) , a senate staffer , to that seat . caroline c. hunter ( r ) , then a member of the election assistance commission ( eac ) , was nominated to the fec seat formerly held by michael e. toner . ( toner resigned from the commission in 2007. ) on may 16 , 2008 , von spakovsky requested that his nomination be withdrawn . on may 22 , 2008 , following a hearing the previous day , the senate rules and administration committee favorably reported the bauerly , hunter , and mcgahn nominations . also on may 22 , 2008 , the white house announced the president's intention to nominate matthew s. petersen ( r ) , a senate staffer , to the seat formerly held by von spakovsky . walther's nomination also continued to remain pending . on june 24 , 2008 , the senate confirmed bauerly , hunter , mcgahn , petersen , and walther . the apparent stalemate over the nominations continued into the second session of the 110 th congress . the lenhard , mason , von spakovsky , and walther nominations remained pending in the senate early in the second session of the 110 th congress , but because the three recess appointments expired at the end of the first session , just two commissioners — mason ( r ) and ellen l. weintraub ( d ) — remained in office . both were previously confirmed by the senate and could continue serving in holdover status following expired terms .