in addition , operations manages projects that affect all house employees . the immediate office includes the office of the chief administrative officer and his support staff . it is responsible for oversight of the operations and customer solutions divisions and directing studies ordered by the house leadership . the immediate office also supervises the management of the three house media galleries , which provide facilities for press coverage of the house ; assists members of congress and staff with the distribution of press releases ; issues the cao's semi - annual report on the office's activities and accomplishments ; and issues the "statement of disbursements of the house. the immediate office also maintains a public website , http: / / cao.house.gov . operations is responsible for developing and maintaining facilities and systems that are used by the house of representatives , including financial management , procurement , technology , and human resources . in addition , operations staff serve as consultants to members' offices on their internal operations and systems . operations is divided into four groups: administration and financial services , handling procurement , financial counseling , payroll and benefits , budget management , resources management , human resources , and workplace safety ; workforce services , handling employee and organizational development , employee assistance , the house learning center , and house child care ; house information resources , handling technology support , technology infrastructure , business solutions , web solutions , facilities management , informational security , and systems engineering ; and immediate operations office , handling business continuity and disaster recovery , business improvement , portfolio management , and committee hearing rooms renovation . these include improving payroll and benefit services , introducing new financial and purchasing systems , upgrading "housenet," and updating the house messaging system . customer solutions is responsible for facilitating the daily work of congressional staff members through the cao customer solutions center ( ccsc ) , which includes the cao call center , firstcall+ . customer solutions is divided into three groups: customer solutions delivery , handling the ccsc , the house recording studio , the office supply store , the house gift shop , and photography ; assets , furnishings and logistics , handling acquisition , payments , equipment maintenance , equipment inventory management , warehousing , carpet , drapes , upholstery , cabinetry , finishing , and modular furniture ; and immediate customer solutions office , handling the disbursement of house resources and supplies and the management of customer relationships . customer solutions is also responsible for office renovations and moving members of the house and their staff to new offices . this responsibility includes holding equipment fairs to demonstrate new technology and products , and service fairs to highlight support offices , including the architect of the capitol , the library of congress ( including the congressional research service ) , the clerk of the house , and the sergeant at arms .