these amounts are not included in the figure below . additional funds that usaid uses to support its global health programs through other accounts in the state - foreign operations appropriations are also not included in the figure below , as congress does not typically direct spending for global health through these other accounts ( see table 1 ) . the obama administration requests that in fy2012 , congress provide approximately 25% more for usaid's global health activities funded through the ghcs account than in fy2010 . the majority of the increases are aimed at areas the administration has prioritized through ghi , including strengthening national health systems and raising investments in areas where progress has lagged . the most notable increases include $846 million for child survival and maternal health programs , up 78.5% from the $474 million congress provided in fy2010 ; $100 million for neglected tropical diseases , up 54% from the $65 million provided in fy2010 ; and $626 million for family planning and reproductive health , up 19% from the $525 million provided in fy2010 . since the george w. bush administration , successive congresses have mostly appropriated funds for usaid's global health programs in excess of presidential requests . as concerns about the u.s. economy have heightened , however , congress has sought ways to reduce federal spending . some members of the 112 th congress have begun to question u.s. foreign aid levels , in general , and to argue for the reduction or elimination of health assistance . although some members of congress argue that cuts to these programs could yield important savings , others contend that such reductions would have little impact on the federal deficit but could significantly imperil the lives of vulnerable populations reliant on u.s. health assistance . congressional debate over funding levels for global health programs is tied to broader , longstanding discussions over the value , design , and funding levels of foreign aid programs . these debates are related to concern over aid effectiveness and reform of usaid , as well as the u.s. federal budget deficit and efforts to reduce government spending . some members have long - questioned the impact of u.s. global health investments , have called attention to corruption practices by various recipient governments receiving global health assistance , and have encouraged greater commitment to global health issues by these states . in march 2011 , members of the house appropriations subcommittee on state - foreign operations raised some of these concerns at oversight and budget hearings . in relation to the administration's fy2012 budget request , some members of congress have argued that investing significant resources in global health represents "misplaced priorities" in a difficult fiscal environment . some have also argued that delaying spending cuts for global health now might necessitate more drastic cuts in the future . usaid is reportedly responding to concerns over aid effectiveness . for example , usaid administrator rajiv shah created a new suspension and debarment task force , led by deputy administrator don steinber , to monitor , investigate , and respond to suspicious activity .