such lighting includes fluorescent bulbs . long considered a more economical choice for commercial and industrial lighting , compact fluorescent light bulbs are becoming more attractive to household consumers . the primary difference between a compact fluorescent light bulb ( cfl ) and a fluorescent tube is the size . unlike tubes , cfls are made to fit into products that can be plugged into standard household light sockets like table lamps and ceiling fixtures . compared to incandescent bulbs that use a heated filament to produce light , cfls contain a gas that produces invisible ultraviolet ( uv ) light when the gas is excited by electricity . uv light hits a white coating inside the fluorescent bulb , which alters the light into light visible to a human eye . because fluorescent bulbs do not use heat to create light , they are far more energy - efficient than regular incandescent bulbs . in the past , complaints about the high cost , harsh light quality , and the inability to use with a dimmer made cfls less attractive to some consumers . however , improvements in technology have resulted in less expensive cfls that illuminate more softly , emitting light similar to light from an incandescent bulb , that are capable of dimming . cfl sales have increased significantly in the past two years . according to the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , 290 million energy star - qualified cfls were sold in 2007 . that is nearly double the number sold in 2006 ( the year that cfl market share increased from a steady 5% to 11% ) , and represents almost 20% of the u.s. light bulb market . mercury is a highly volatile , naturally occurring element . it conducts electricity , is liquid at room temperature , combines easily with other metals , and expands and contracts evenly with temperature change . these properties make mercury useful in a variety of household , medical , and industrial products and processes . mercury is also a potent neurotoxin that can , at certain exposure levels , cause brain , lung , and kidney damage . mercury is an essential component of cfls that allows a bulb to be an efficient light source . fluorescent bulbs , unlike many other mercury - containing consumer products , are among the few products for which non - mercury substitutes do not exist . still , over the past 20 years , the mercury content in fluorescent tubes and bulbs has declined steadily . a cfl generally contains 2 to 6 milligrams ( mg ) of mercury ( an amount that poses virtually no risk of harm ) . by comparison , mercury has been present for decades in the following household products: watch batteries ( 25 mg ) , dental amalgams ( 500 mg ) , thermometers ( 500 mg to 2 grams ( g ) ) , thermostats ( 3 g ) , electrical switches and relays ( 3.5 g ) , and standard fluorescent tubes ( up to 40 mg ; lighting manufacturers now produce low - mercury fluorescent tubes that generally contain less than 9 mg of mercury ) .