another , 18 u.s.c . the crime has three essential elements . first , there must be a proceeding pending before a department or agency of the united states . second , the defendant must be aware of the pending proceeding . third , the defendant must have intentionally endeavored corruptly to influence , obstruct , or impede the pending proceeding . section 1505 offenses are not rico or money laundering predicate offenses . conspiracy to obstruct administrative or congressional proceedings may be prosecuted under 18 u.s.c . 371 , and the general aiding and abetting , accessory after the fact , and misprision statutes are likely to apply with equal force in the case of obstruction of an administrative or congressional proceeding . section 1513 prohibits witness or informant retaliation in the form of killing , attempting to kill , inflicting or threatening to inflict bodily injury , damaging or threatening to damage property , and conspiracies to do so . it also prohibits economic retaliation against federal witnesses , but only witnesses in court proceedings and only on criminal cases . its penalty structure is comparable to that of section 1503 . section 1513 offenses are rico predicate offenses and money laundering predicate offenses , and the provisions for conspirators and accomplices apply as well . section 371 contains both a general conspiracy prohibition and a specific obstruction conspiracy prohibition in the form of a conspiracy to defraud proscription . the elements of conspiracy to defraud the united states are ( 1 ) an agreement of two more individuals ; ( 2 ) to defraud the united states ; and ( 3 ) an overt act by one of the conspirators in furtherance of the scheme . the fraud covered by the statute reaches any conspiracy for the purpose of impairing , obstructing or defeating the lawful functions of any department of government by deceit , craft , or trickery , or at least by means that are dishonest . the scheme may be designed to deprive the united states of money or property , but it need not be so ; a plot calculated to frustrate the functions of a governmental entity will suffice . the final and oldest of the general obstruction provisions is contempt . contemporary federal contempt derives from statute , rule , and inherent or auxiliary authority . criminal contempt comes in two forms , direct and indirect . direct contempt involves misconduct in the presence of the court and is punished to ensure the decorum of the court and the dignity of the bench . indirect contempt consists of those obstructions committed outside the presence of the court . direct contempt may be summarily punished ; indirect contempt may not . 1621 , the older and more general prohibition that proscribes false swearing in federal official matters ( judicial , legislative , or administrative ) ; and 18 u.s.c . 2232 ( a ) prohibits the destruction of property to prevent the government from searching or seizing it . in addition to the obstruction of justice provisions of 18 u.s.c . 1503 and 1512 , there are four other general statutes that outlaw obstructing the government's business by deception . three involve perjury: 18 u.s.c .