( a ) limitation. the house report on h.r . dod concurred with our recommendation . we also identified shortcomings in dod's 2005 mobility capabilities study approach that , if not addressed , could be repeated again in the current study . unlike prior studies , the 2005 study did not recommend a specific airlift requirement expressed in million ton - miles per day — a common metric integral to prior capability studies that defines and quantifies airlift requirements as a basis for computing the size and optimal mix of airlift forces . instead , dod officials stated that it expressed its airlift requirement in terms of specific numbers and types of aircraft needed to meet the national defense strategy to take into account real - world operating parameters that may cause aircraft payloads to vary significantly from standard planning factors . later , in response to congressional direction , dod translated the requirements into a million ton - mile requirement . we also found the study did not identify the operational impact of increased or decreased strategic airlift on achieving warfighting objectives that would be associated with different mixes of c - 5 and c - 17 aircraft . as a result , we could not determine how the study concluded that the mix of c - 5s and c - 17s at that time was adequate for meeting mobility requirements and for supporting strategic airlift portfolio investment decisions . in 2006 , we recommended that dod include mobility metrics , along with warfighting metrics to determine air superiority , when completing future mobility capabilities studies . dod concurred with this recommendation . although dod concurred with the recommendation , a transportation command official stated that a decision has not yet been made on what specific metrics will be used to determine the number and mix of strategic airlifters in the current mobility capabilities study . at the time of this writing , the study plan had not been finalized and it is unclear whether a million ton - miles metric will be used , though it is being considered . dod often uses the million ton - mile metric as an easy way to compare the capacity of different fleet mixes . for example , according to a dod official , since c - 130s , c - 130js , c - 17s , c - 5as , c - 5bs , and c - 5ms all have different capabilities when it comes to payload and range , it is difficult to compare different mixes of them without using this metric . the report also stated: the c - 5 and c - 17 provide complementary capabilities . however , dod continues to struggle with identifying the specific quantities and determining the optimal mix of aircraft needed . clarity is needed before committing additional billions of dollars to c - 5 modernization programs , establishing c - 5 retirement schedules , and / or acquiring additional c - 17 aircraft . careful planning is also important to avoid the costs of shutting down the c - 17 line prematurely and later deciding to restart the production .