other losses were covered by the government . in addition , a number of other insights emerged from the chilean crisis: the market could not resolve a system - wide failure , particularly in the case where there was a high expectation of a government bailout . the expectation of a bailout became self - fulfilling and increased the cost . appropriate prudential supervision and regulation were critical for restoring health and confidence to the financial system . observers lamented the a priori lack of attention to proper regulation . private institutions that survived shared in the cost and responsibility to resolve the crisis to the apparent long - term benefit of the financial sector . the fiscal cost of the three policies discussed above was high . liquidating insolvent institutions had the highest cost followed by the purchase of non - performing loans and rescheduling of domestic debts . the strategy , however , is widely recognized as having allowed the financial system and economy to return to a path of stability and long - term growth . debt was not evaluated by risk characteristics . most debt was commercial loans , but banks also carried some portion of consumer and mortgage debt . as firms and households became increasingly financially stressed , and as asset prices plummeted , the solvency of national banks became questionable . two issues would later be identified: the ability of borrowers to make debt payments , and more importantly , the reluctance of borrowers to do so given there was a broadly - held assumption that the government would intervene . by november 1981 , the first national banks and financial institutions that were subsidiaries of conglomerates failed and had to be taken over by regulatory authorities . most debt was short term and banks were in no position to restructure because they had no access to long - term funds . instead , they rolled over short - term loans , capitalized the interest due , and raised interest rates . this plan was described by one economist as an unsustainable "ponzi" scheme , and indeed was a critical factor in bringing down many banks as their balance sheets rapidly deteriorated . from 1980 to 1983 , past - due loans rose from 1.1% to 8.4% of total loans outstanding . the sense of crisis further deepened because many of the financial institutions were subsidiaries of conglomerates that also had control over large pension funds , which were heavily invested in bank time deposits and bank mortgage bonds . in the end , although the roots of the banking crisis were different than those in the united states , the chilean government faced the possibility of a complete failure of the financial sector as credit markets contracted . the central bank of chile took control of the crisis by enacting three major policies intended to maintain liquidity in the financial system , assist borrowers , and strengthen lender balance sheets . this trend came to a sudden halt with the 1981-82 global recession . the financial sector found itself suddenly in a highly compromised position . weak bank regulations had allowed the financial sector to take on tremendous amounts of debt without adequate capitalization .