the standing issue . standing is a ubiquitous threshold issue in global warming litigation , given the difficulty faced by plaintiffs in showing that their specific injuries were caused by the particular actions of the defendants in the case . commonwealth of massachusetts fits the mold . petitioners , epa argues , cannot establish two of the three elements of article iii standing: causation and redressability . as to causation , epa describes petitioners' declarations as saying only that ghgs emitted from many different sources all over the world cause global warming . however , it points out , to have standing , petitioners must assert that the subject matter of this case — emissions of ghgs from new motor vehicles in the u.s. — causes or meaningfully contributes to their injuries . as to redressability , epa argues that petitioners' declarations do not establish that a mere reduction in the specified ghgs will be sufficient to eliminate or reduce the injury they will suffer . certainly justice scalia , the leader of the court's efforts to narrow standing in a series of 1990s decisions , would be inclined to rule against the commonwealth of massachusetts petitioners on standing grounds . alternatively , the supreme court might use the case to clarify when a court may , as judge randolph did , bypass its general edict that jurisdictional issues such as standing be addressed first , in order to decide the case on an easy merits issue . if the standing hurdle is surmounted , petitioners' case still could fall on either of the statutory issues raised in the briefs: whether "any air pollutant" includes emissions regulated on the basis of their global warming effects and whether "in his judgment" allows epa considerations of factors other than those going to whether the pollutant endangers public health or welfare . in addition , there is an issue , sometimes raised in administrative law cases , whether the epa administrator has a mandatory duty to issue the "judgment" that triggers section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) regulation once he comes into possession of data allowing him to make it . because this issue has not been raised by the parties , one suspects the supreme court will not address it . in sum , there are multiple ways the court could resolve commonwealth of massachusetts or remand to the d.c . circuit for that court to resolve . it is highly unlikely that the litigation will result in a direct judicial order to epa to regulate new - motor - vehicle ghg emissions ; at most , if petitioners win , one or another court will require additional determinations by the agency . should regulation of motor - vehicle ghg emissions be the ultimate result , however , it would increase the pressure on epa to regulate the ghg emissions of stationary sources ( powerplants and factories ) as well . a decision by the supreme court is expected by june 2007 . should the court get past the standing issue , the opening question on the merits goes to epa authority: did congress in section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) empower epa to regulate new motor vehicle emissions based on their global warming effects ?