b . the average state unemployment tax rate was at least 75% of the average benefit - cost ratio over the preceding five calendar years , where the benefit - cost ratio for a year is defined as the amount of benefits and interest paid in the year divided by the total covered wages paid in the year . table 2 lists outstanding state loans . ( at this time , only the u.s. virgin islands has an outstanding loan. ) the table also includes information on accrued interest payments for fy2019 . the third column provides information on whether the state was subject to a credit reduction for tax year 2018 . the last column provides the net futa tax faced by employers in each state that had an outstanding loan . the full effect of the requirements began in 2019 . states must have had at least one year in the past five calendar years before the year in which advances are taken in which the average high cost multiple ( ahcm ) was greater than or equal to 1.0 . additionally , states must meet two criteria for maintenance - of - tax effort in every year from the most recent year the ahcm was at least 1.0 and the year in which loans are taken . the average state unemployment tax rate ( total state unemployment tax amount collected over total taxable wages ) was at least 80% of the prior year's rate . such appropriations require discretionary action by congress and the president . once a state recognizes that it does not have sufficient funds to pay uc benefits , the mechanism for receiving a loan from the utf is straightforward . the state's governor ( or the governor's designee ) must submit a letter requesting that the u.s. labor secretary advance funds to the state account within the utf . once the loan is approved by the u.s. labor secretary , the funds are placed into the state account in monthly increments . states with outstanding loans from the utf must repay them fully by the november 10 following the second consecutive january 1 on which the state has an outstanding loan . if the outstanding loan is not repaid by that time , the state will face an effective federal tax increase . thus , a state may have approximately 22 months ( if borrowing began on january 1 ) to 34 months ( if borrowing began on january 2 ) to repay the loan without a federal tax increase , depending on when it obtained the outstanding loan . as of january 29 , 2019 , approximately $68.3 million in federal utf loans to the states were outstanding . a current list of states with outstanding loans may be found at the department of labor's ( dol's ) website , https: / / oui.doleta.gov / unemploy / budget.asp . since april 1 , 1982 ( p.l . 97-35 as amended ) , states have been charged interest on new loans that are not repaid by the end of the fiscal year in which they were obtained . ( before april 1 , 1982 , states could receive these loans interest free. )