of the aea . key dates for bilateral civilian nuclear cooperation ( "section 123" ) agreements appendix b. enrichment and reprocessing restrictions although some experts have advocated requiring governments to forgo enrichment and reprocessing ( a nonproliferation commitment sometimes referred to as the "gold standard" ) as a condition for concluding a nuclear cooperation agreement , the atomic energy act ( aea ) does not include such a requirement . in recent years , the united states has attempted to persuade certain countries with which it is negotiating nuclear cooperation agreements to forgo enrichment and reprocessing and conclude additional protocols to their international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards agreements ; past u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements have not included these additional components . the aea does mandate that u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements require u.s. consent for any "alteration in form or content" ( to include enrichment or reprocessing ) of u.s. - origin material or any material processed in a plant containing transferred u.s. nuclear technology . such agreements also require u.s. consent for any retransfer of material or technology . the united states has argued that its december 2009 nuclear cooperation agreement with the united arab emirates ( uae ) could set a useful precedent for mitigating the dangers of nuclear proliferation . for example , president barack obama's may 21 , 2009 , letter transmitting the agreement to congress argued that the agreement had "the potential to serve as a model for other countries in the region that wish to pursue responsible nuclear energy development. similarly , then - state department spokesperson p.j . crowley described the agreement as "the gold standard" during an august 5 , 2010 , press briefing , although the obama administration generally did not use this term when describing its nuclear cooperation policies . the u.s. - uae agreement's status as a potential model is grounded in two nonproliferation provisions not found in other u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements . first , the agreement requires the country to bring into force the additional protocol to its safeguards agreement before the united states licenses "exports of nuclear material , equipment , components , or technology" pursuant to the agreement . second , the agreement states that the uae shall not possess sensitive nuclear facilities within its territory or otherwise engage in activities within its territory for , or relating to , the enrichment or reprocessing of material , or for the alteration in form or content ( except by irradiation or further irradiation or , if agreed by the parties , post - irradiation examination ) of plutonium , uranium 233 , high enriched uranium , or irradiated source or special fissionable material . the u.s. - uae agreement also provides the united states with the right to terminate nuclear cooperation and to require the return of any nuclear "material , equipment or components ... and any special fissionable material produced through their use" if , after the agreement's entry into force , the uae "possesses sensitive nuclear facilities within its territory or otherwise engages in activities within its territory relating to enrichment of uranium or reprocessing of nuclear fuel.