initially , litigants in school finance cases focused on the issue of equity . arguing that the funding disparities among school districts were inequitable , the plaintiffs in these cases contended that such inequities were unconstitutional and should be remedied by equalizing funding among all school districts . although the u.s. supreme court had rejected arguments based on the equal protection clause of the u.s. constitution , advocates for school financing reform typically based their new legal claims on equal protection provisions found within the constitutions of individual states . for example , in serrano v. priest , which is the most prominent example of an equity - based education finance claim , the supreme court of california held that the state finance system for public schools violated the equal protection provisions in the california constitution because "discrimination in educational opportunity on the basis of district wealth involves a suspect classification , and ... education is a fundamental interest. although an equity - based litigation strategy was effective in some of the early cases: [the] difficulties of actually achieving equal educational opportunity through the fiscal neutrality principle , as well as political resistance to judicial attempts to enforce court orders in the initial fiscal equity cases , seem to have dissuaded other state courts from venturing down this path . despite an initial flurry of pro - plaintiff decisions in the mid - 1970s , by the mid - 1980's , the pendulum had decisively swung the other way: plaintiffs won only two decisions in the early '80s , and , as of 1988 ... 15 of the state supreme courts had denied any relief to the plaintiffs ... compared to the seven states in which plaintiffs had prevailed . the court's holding that there was no discrimination against a suspect class and no interference with a fundamental right was important because it determined the degree of judicial scrutiny that the texas financing system received . had the court found a violation of equal protection or infringement of a fundamental right , then the texas school funding system would have been subject to strict scrutiny and the state would have been required to offer a compelling state interest as justification for the system . as a result of this diminished success with equity - based claims , plaintiffs in school financing cases began bringing school finance claims based on adequacy theories instead . in the absence of such a finding , however , the texas financing system was subject to rational basis review . under that standard , the court upheld the state funding system as rationally related to the legitimate state interest of maintaining local control over matters involving education and taxation . as noted above , the rodriguez case foreclosed school finance claims based on the federal constitution and prompted plaintiffs to file lawsuits based on state constitutional claims instead , thereby transforming education finance litigation into an issue of state law . this section discusses the two major legal theories involved in state education finance litigation — equity and adequacy — as well as leading cases in these areas .