on the other hand , the program has arguably struggled to demonstrate its effectiveness . epa estimates that there are more than 450,000 brownfields sites throughout the country . as the brownfields definition indicates , whether contamination is present at all of these sites is uncertain . the environmental contamination at a brownfield site , if it exists at all , is not as serious or threatening as the contamination at superfund sites . often , the mere perception of environmental contamination may hinder site reuse , because interested parties may be concerned they would face cleanup responsibilities . thus , a primary objective of the brownfields program is site assessment . this report describes the scope and purpose of epa's brownfields program , reviews appropriation levels for the program , and highlights considerations for policymakers . congress funds epa's brownfields program with appropriations from two large accounts: the state and tribal assistance grants ( stag ) account and epa's environmental programs and management account . from within these large accounts , the brownfields program is funded by three line - items ( table 1 ) . the stag account funds two line - items: section 104 ( k ) and section 128 grant programs . the management account includes a line - item for the administrative expenses of the brownfields program . since the enactment of the 2002 brownfields act , appropriations for the aggregate of these three brownfields line - items have been relatively consistent , with total funding ranging from $163 million to nearly $170 million ( table 1 ) . there appears to be broad consensus that a federal role in the cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields is desirable . however , issues regarding the degree of financial assistance and overall program effectiveness have been raised . since the enactment of the brownfields act in 2002 , congress has funded the program below its initial authorized level . total appropriations ( in table 1 ) represent approximately 66% of the initial funding authorization—$250 million each year , between fy2002 - fy2006 . some states and communities would argue that the demand for funding far exceeds what has been made available by congress . what are federal funding levels achieving: environmental risk reduction , economic redevelopment , or some combination thereof ? the 2004 gao report found that "the agency has not yet developed measures to determine the extent to which the brownfields program helps reduce environmental risks. the federal role in assisting states and communities to clean up brownfields for productive use has been an ongoing issue for more than a decade . as defined by statute , brownfield sites are "real property , the expansion , redevelopment , or reuse of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance , pollutant , or contaminant" ( emphasis added ) . the environmental protection agency ( epa ) addresses environmental contamination primarily through the superfund and brownfields programs . although epa's superfund and brownfields programs are related , the programs are different in their objectives and the sites they address . the superfund program and its federal funding generally cover only the sites with the highest levels of contamination or those that present immediate risks .