there are certain statutory exceptions to the anti - kickback statute . under one exception , "remuneration" does not include a discount or other reduction in price obtained by a provider of services or other entity if the reduction in price is properly disclosed and reflected in the costs claimed or charges made by the provider or entity under a federal health care program . another exception includes , under certain circumstances , amounts paid by a vendor of goods or services to a person authorized to act as a purchasing agent for a group of individuals that furnish services reimbursable by a federal health program . in addition to these exceptions , the department of health and human services' office of inspector general ( oig ) has promulgated regulations that contain several "safe harbors" to prevent common business arrangements from being considered kickbacks . safe harbors listed by regulation include certain types of investment interests , personal services and management contracts , referral services , and space rental or equipment rental arrangements . oig has indicated that the safe harbor provisions are not indicative of the only acceptable business arrangements , and that business arrangements that do not comply with a safe harbor are not necessarily considered "suspect. limitations on physician self - referrals were enacted into law in 1989 under the ethics in patient referrals act , commonly referred to as the "stark law. the stark law , as amended , and its implementing regulations prohibit certain physician self - referrals for designated health services ( dhs ) that may be paid for by medicare or medicaid . in its basic application , the stark law provides that if ( 1 ) a physician ( or an immediate family member of a physician ) has a "financial relationship" with an entity , the physician may not make a referral to the entity for the furnishing of designated health services ( dhs ) for which payment may be made under medicare or medicaid , and ( 2 ) the entity may not present ( or cause to be presented ) a claim to the federal health care program or bill to any individual or entity for dhs furnished pursuant to a prohibited referral . it has been noted that the general idea behind the prohibitions in the stark law is to prevent physicians from making referrals based on financial gain , thus preventing overutilization and increases in health care costs . a "financial relationship" under the stark law consists of either ( 1 ) an "ownership or investment interest" in the entity or ( 2 ) a "compensation arrangement" between the physician ( or immediate family member ) and the entity . an "ownership or investment interest" includes "equity , debt , or other means," as well as "an interest in an entity that holds an ownership or investment interest in any entity providing the designated health service. a "compensation arrangement" is generally defined as an arrangement involving any remuneration between a physician ( or an immediate family member of such physician ) and an entity , other than certain arrangements that are specifically mentioned as being excluded from the reach of the statute .