examples of some of those comments are summarized here . specifically , commenters objected that the proposed rule was more than a clarification of existing policy and that implementation of the rule would impose substantial administrative changes on state medicaid programs and significantly decrease hospital revenues . cms's determination that no regulatory impact analysis was necessary was considered by commenters to be inaccurate and did not constitute appropriate notification or provide sufficient data to the affected parties . this shortcoming was compounded by the length of the comment period ( 30 days and not 60 days ) , which also undermined the ability of interested parties to submit informed comments . certain commenters raised substantive technical objections to the proposed upl methodologies . for instance , a upl calculated using the medicare payment - to - charge ratio established from the cost report worksheets referenced in the proposed rule would not include the beneficiary co - payment and coinsurance amounts , which constitute at least 20% of medicare's allowed payment amounts under opps . the other upl calculation that would potentially limit medicaid payments for oph services to costs was challenged as well . the statement by cms that the cost - to - charge ratio would produce the highest amount that cms would pay for hospital outpatient services was seen as inaccurate , because under the medicare opps , efficient hospitals are allowed to retain apc - based payments above service costs . also , cms did not address the application of this proposed rule to critical access hospitals , which receive medicare payments based on 101% of their allowable costs . finally , the proposed methodology to establish the upl for freestanding clinic services was criticized , because it did not recognize the prevalence of cost - based reimbursement for private clinic services by medicaid and would result in significant access problems for these services . the final rule , issued on november 7 , 2008 ( 73 federal register 66187 ) , made a major change to the proposed rule . as noted above , commenters on the proposed oph rule argued that , because it incorporated the new definition of hospital categories adopted in the final rule regarding cost limits on government providers , this rule violated the moratorium on implementing any provision of the rule on cost limits for government providers . in light of these views , and given this moratorium , cms elected to exclude from its final oph rule the proposed regulatory language delineating methods for demonstrating compliance with the medicaid upper payment limit on outpatient hospital and clinic services provided in privately operated facilities . cms did adopt the proposed outpatient hospital service definition effective december 8 , 2008 . as of january 26 , 2009 , 12 states have submitted pending state plan amendments to comply with the new final regulation . during the 110 th congress , legislation to delay implementation of the oph services rule , as well as other recent medicaid regulations , was introduced ( eg , s. 2460 and s. 2819 ) . 5613 , as passed by the house , and h.r .