the proposed regulations delineate exceptions where a service animal may be removed . these include where the animal is out of control or not housebroken , and where the animal poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation . if the animal is excluded because of these reasons , the entity must give the individual with a disability the opportunity to participate without the animal . the work the service animal performs must be directly related to the individual's disability and the animal must be individually trained , housebroken , under the control of its handler , and have a harness , leash , or other tether . a public entity or public accommodation is not responsible for supervising the animal and , although the entity may not ask about the individual's disability or require documentation , the entity may ask what work the animal has been trained to perform . these guidelines have no legal effect and serve as guidance only until adopted by the department of justice in final regulations . however , it is instructive to briefly examine the provisions of the regulations which were proposed in june 2008 . the adoption of the access board guidelines would serve to increase accessibility ; however , the department of justice expressed concern about the potential effect of these changes on existing structures . to address these concerns , doj added "safe harbor" provisions for both titles ii and iii . for title ii , which applies to states and localities , individuals with disabilities must be provided access to programs "when viewed in their entirety. unlike title iii , a public entity under title ii is not required to make each of its existing facilities accessible . however , in order to provide certainty to public entities and individuals with disabilities , doj's proposed regulations add a "safe harbor" provision stating that "public entities that have brought elements into compliance in existing facilities are not , simply because of the department's adoption of the 2004 adaag as its new standards , required to modify those elements in order to reflect incremental changes in the proposed standards. in its june 17 , 2008 , notice of proposed rule makings ( nprm ) , doj proposed the adoption of parts i and iii of the access board guidelines and also proposed several other amendments . the regulations were sent to the office of management and budget ( omb ) but were not released for publication in the federal register . in its discussion of the proposed regulations , the justice department observed that it received a large number of complaints about service animals and that there was a trend toward the use of wild or exotic animals . the justice department also noted a distinction between "comfort animals" that have the sole function of providing emotional support and which would not be covered , and "psychiatric service animals" which may be trained to provide a number of services , such as reminding an individual to take his or her medicine , and which would be covered .