these tax benefits are significant as well . lower rates for capital gains and dividends are estimated by the jct to lose $131.0 billion in fy2009 , the failure to tax gains at death $57.5 billion , and the deferral of gain for gifts $5.9 billion . while there is not a separate estimate for excluding imputed rent , the value of deducting costs ( even though gross rent is not included in income ) through itemized deductions is $85.2 billion for mortgage interest and $14.2 billion for property taxes . there are penalties for early withdrawal and mandatory distribution requirements . as described above , iras were treated the same way as pension plans , with contributions deductible and withdrawals taxable . the roth ira ( also called a back - loaded ira ) , was added as an option in 1997 , when eligibility for both types of iras was expanded . the tax treatment of this account is similar to that of a tax exempt bond: earnings are simply not taxed . the earnings phase - outs are higher and treatment is , in general , more generous than in the case of the deductible ira . the annual deduction limit for ira contributions when expanded in 1997 was the lesser of $2,000 or 100% of compensation ; that limit was increased under the temporary provisions of the 2001 tax cut and eventually made permanent at $5,000 . the 2001 act also introduced a tax credit for contributions by low income individuals . favorable tax treatment of pensions , namely allowing the firm to deduct contributions which are not included in employees income and exempting the earnings of pension trusts as in the case of deductible iras , has been in place almost since the inception of the tax law . pensions fall into two types: defined benefit plans where payments depend on earnings and years of service at retirement , and defined contribution plans where payments depend on the amount accumulated in an account . pensions are subject to many rules and regulations designed to ensure that tax benefits do not accrue to owners and highly compensated managers and that pension trusts are adequately funded in the case of defined benefit plans . of course to the extent that pension assets ( or ira assets ) are invested in corporate stock , tax is collected at the corporate level . tax benefits for pension plans are much more important in dollar terms than are tax benefits for iras . for fy2009 , according the latest joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimates , employer pensions resulted in a revenue loss of $120.4 billion , with plans for self - employed individuals ( called keogh plans ) costing $9.5 billion . iras resulted in a loss of $18.5 billion . in the case of dividends , about half of the income is not subject to tax because of tax preferred status . there are other savings and investments that receive favorable treatment under the individual income tax . capital gains has historically been favorably treated , both through lower tax rates , deferral ( taxed only when realized ) , and forgiveness of tax if passed on at death .