where do those shares come from ? normally , they are borrowed by the broker from another investor or from a brokerage's own account . this is usually not difficult to do if the shares are issued by a large company , where millions of shares change hands daily and where many shares are not registered to the actual owners , but are held in "street name," that is , in the broker's account . with smaller corporations , however , the number of shares in circulation may be limited , and brokers may find it difficult to locate shares to deliver to the buyer in a short sale transaction . when shares are not located to "cover" a short sale , the short position is said to be naked . if shares are not found by the time the transaction must be settled , there is a "failure to deliver" shares to the buyer . if it occurs sporadically and on a small scale , naked short selling does not raise serious manipulation concerns . however , when the number of shares sold short represents a significant fraction of all shares outstanding , there may be a strong impact on the share price . in such cases , when naked short selling creates a virtually unlimited quantity of shares , a market based on supply and demand can be seriously distorted . the sec notes that "naked short sellers enjoy greater leverage than if they were required to borrow securities and deliver within a reasonable time period , and they may use this additional leverage to engage in trading activities that deliberately depress the price of a security. opponents of naked short selling also charge that by permitting short sales to occur when there is no possibility of actually delivering shares to the buyers , brokers and dealers accommodate manipulation . when naked short selling drives prices down , holders of the stock understandably feel cheated . they do not believe the stock is overvalued ; they are not selling ; but the price drops anyway . it is important to note that naked short selling is not always evidence of intent to manipulate prices . under certain circumstances , a market maker may engage in naked short selling to stabilize the market . for example , assume that there is a sudden flurry of buy orders for a stock . the market maker may judge the buying interest to be temporary and not justified by any real news about the company's prospects . it may be the result of a questionable press release or a rumor in an internet chat room . the market maker may choose to sell short to avoid what in its view would be an unjustified run - up in the stock's price . in this situation , naked short selling by the market maker may protect investors against manipulation . it is also worth noting that while restrictions on short selling discourage certain forms of manipulation , they may encourage or facilitate others . manipulations that involve artificially inflating stock prices are probably more common than techniques ( like naked shorting ) that seek to depress them .