others are less sanguine . andrey illarionov , putin's former economic advisor , calls russia a unique historical "siloviki dictatorship," and argues that medvedev has used his legal background to reverse democratization in the country . he warns that recent russian actions such as cyber attacks on estonia , the radiation poisoning of alexander litvinenko in england , and the closure of the british council offices in russia are typical of such a regime . there are enough powers [for me]. these observers also speculate that medvedev was chosen with the expectation that he would not touch the personal assets of — or otherwise reverse policies benefitting — the putin - era "siloviki" ( literally , "strong ones," referring to many of putin's associates with ties to the security agencies ) . other observers argue that since medvedev prevailed during in - fighting in the kremlin , he may well have a strong will as president . they predict that , just as putin moved against some of the so - called oligarchs late in his first term in office , medvedev also may move slowly to assert himself vis - à - vis the "siloviki. he had never run for elective office . four candidates were able to register for the march 2 , 2008 , presidential election . three of the four candidates — medvedev , gennadiy zyuganov , and vladimir zhirinovskiy — were nominated by parties with seats in the duma . according to the election rules , other prospective candidates had to gather two million signatures of support within a few weeks . one prospective self - nominated candidate , well - known oppositionist mikhail kasyanov , was denied registration , after repeated examinations of his signature lists by the central electoral commission ( cec ) alleged a higher - than - permitted number of invalid signatures . oppositionist garry kasparov alleged that his united civil front group was repeatedly turned down in its attempts to rent halls for a meeting to nominate him as its candidate . oppositionist boris nemtsov , nominated by the union of right forces party , received approval from the cec on december 22 , 2007 , to gather signatures , but he ended his campaign four days later , stating that the government had predetermined who would be president . a prospective candidate from the tiny pro - putin democratic party , the little - known andrey bogdanov , was able to gather two million signatures and was approved as a candidate . medvedev refused to debate the other candidates , "whose programs ... obviously have no chance of being implemented. debates between the other candidates often were broadcast only late at night or early morning . the russian non - governmental organization golos ( "voice" ) concluded that in many regions where its representatives carried out pre - election monitoring , medvedev received overwhelming television coverage . zyuganov and zhirinovskiy filed several complaints with the courts alleging unequal coverage by state television , which appeared to spur slightly more coverage for zyuganov .