designation . if the chamber of origin votes to repass the bill , then the bill with the veto message is transmitted to the second chamber , which then also reconsiders it . nothing in the constitution requires that either chamber vote directly on the question of repassing a vetoed bill . the chambers have , for example , referred a vetoed bill to committee instead . if either chamber fails to vote on the question of repassing the bill , then the measure dies at the end of the congress . both chambers will not necessarily even have a chance to take up the question . the question of overriding a veto is debatable under the regular rules of the senate . the question could be debated as long as any senator sought recognition to discuss it . debate on the question of overriding a veto can be limited by unanimous consent or by invoking cloture . ending debate through a cloture motion requires the support of three - fifths of senators duly chosen and sworn , or 60 senators if there is no more than one vacancy . cloture is rarely used to end debate on overriding a presidential veto . the number of senators required to end debate is less than the number required to override a veto ( assuming that there are no vacancies and more than 90 senators vote on the override question ) . two - thirds of the senators voting , a quorum being present , must agree to override the veto and repass the bill . the vote must be a roll - call vote and not a voice vote , due to the constitutional requirement that the vote be by the "yeas and nays. a motion to reconsider the vote on the question of overriding a veto is in order only if the senate fails to override the veto . in other words , if two - thirds of the senators agree to override the veto , a motion to reconsider that vote is not in order . if the senate fails to override a veto of a senate - originated bill ( s. or s.j . , then the question of override never reaches the house . the senate simply informs the house that the override vote on a house or senate bill was unsuccessful . if the override vote on a senate - originated measure ( s. or s.j . is successful in the senate , the bill and veto message are sent to the house for action . if the override vote on a house - originated measure ( h.r . is successful , then the bill becomes law , because two - thirds of both chambers have agreed to override the veto . if two - thirds of the members of the chamber of origin do not agree to override a veto , then the measure dies , and the other chamber does not have an opportunity to vote on the question of repassing the bill . the constitution does not otherwise address how congress should consider a vetoed bill , and it is therefore house and senate rules and practices that additionally govern the treatment of bills vetoed and returned by the president .