aso is known as a foreign policy hawk . he has strongly advocated revising the "peace clause" ( article 9 ) of the japanese constitution to allow japan to more easily deploy its self - defense forces overseas . during his stint as foreign minister ( 2005-2006 ) , he and then - prime minister shinzo abe tried to deepen japan's alliance with the united states . they also touted a "values - based diplomacy" that called for expanded cooperation with democracies in asia , particularly the united states , australia , and india . aso has a reputation as a "revisionist" on historical issues , which could lead to tensions with china and south korea if he becomes prime minister . in the past , aso has praised some aspects of japan's colonization of asian countries in the first part of the 20 th century and voiced support for official visits to yasukuni shrine . visits by former leaders to the controversial shinto shrine that honors japan's war dead — including several convicted class a war criminals — have severely strained relations with china and other asian countries . other candidates include current economic and fiscal policy minister kaoru yosano ( 70 ) , a strong opponent of increased government spending who argues that the consumption tax must be raised in order to save the national pension system . former defense minister and popular television anchor yuriko koike ( 56 ) , a proponent of re - energizing the government's structural reforms championed by koizumi , is the first woman to run for the ldp presidency . former transportation minister and ldp policy chief nobuteru ishihara ( 51 ) , the son of the popular mayor of tokyo , also favors structural reforms . another former defense minister , shigeru ishiba ( 51 ) , favors increased government spending and is emphasizing his plan to enact a permanent law enabling japan to dispatch the self - defense forces overseas whenever necessary . if lower house elections are held in the near future , the dpj is expected to use the same strategy of emphasizing economic and social issues that propelled it to victory in the july 2007 elections for the upper house of japan's diet . ozawa has unveiled a highly populist policy blueprint that includes items such as providing income support to farmers and fishermen ; abolishing certain provisional taxes ; and reforming the national pension and healthcare systems . he would offset the over 18 trillion yen ( over $160 billion ) in revenue shortfalls by eliminating or trimming what he has called "wasteful" government programs that are funded through various "special accounts. ozawa also has outlined measures to reduce bureaucrats' influence over politicians and has called for japanese troops to participate in u.n. peacekeeping operations . though ozawa is not popular in opinion polls , he is respected in his party for his campaign prowess . analysts point to a number of possible outcomes from the ongoing political turbulence . one possibility is continued paralysis , particularly if the ldp wins the lower house elections but loses its 2 / 3 majority .