ultimately they prevailed . the singapore ministerial declaration , reporting on what they decided , stated that the ilo ( rather than the wto ) would be the "competent body to set and deal with ... internationally recognized core labor standards. the ilo has no enforcement tools , but rather promotes labor standards through consensus , moral suasion , and technical assistance . inclusion of labor provisions in bilateral u.s. trade agreements has evolved . the first two u.s. ftas with israel , 1985 , and canada , 1988 , did not include labor provisions . this pattern began to change after 1993 , when a number of factors came into play . first , the united states began to undertake fta negotiations with lesser - developed countries . second , it became increasingly accepted that labor issues were related to trade and trade policy . third , consensus broadened that globalization had both costs and benefits . the benefits tend to be broadly dispersed and include relatively higher economic growth and productivity and greater access to lower - priced goods . the costs tend to be concentrated in import - competing sectors where there may be downward pressure on wages and job displacement . in developing countries , pressures to become a low - cost producer can lead to diminished working conditions and diminished worker rights . fourth , business groups have increasingly been willing to make some concessions to labor groups in order to promote trade agreements and pave the way for greater trade with and investment in developing countries . since 1993 , the united states has negotiated 13 ftas that include 19 countries . these are , chronologically , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) with mexico and canada ; bilateral agreements with jordan , chile , singapore , australia , morocco , bahrain , and oman ; a regional agreement known as cafta - dr , with the dominican republic and the five central american countries ( costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua ) ; and bilateral ftas with peru , colombia , panama , and south korea . the last four agreements reflect a bipartisan compromise on labor language as delineated in the "bipartisan trade deal" ( popularly known as the "may 10 th agreement," ) jointly agreed to between the leadership in congress and the administration on may 10 , 2007 . this agreement calls for , among other things , several additional labor provisions in ftas including: ( 1 ) a fully enforceable commitment that fta countries will adopt , maintain , and enforce in their laws and practice , the basic international labor standards as stated in the 1998 ilo declaration ; and ( 2 ) the use of identical enforcement provisions for labor and the other provisions in the agreements . labor and enforcement provisions in these various trade agreements can be categorized into four different models .