other observers discount such perceptions of liberalization . berdimuhammedow's pledge to continue niyazov's policies may not bode well for human rights reforms , they argue . they also point out that berdimuhammedow officiated over such policies as the near - destruction of medical care , despite his own credentials as a dentist . ominous human rights developments in recent days include the arrest and disappearance of environmentalist andrey zatoka on december 17 and oppositionist nurberdi nurmamedow on december 23 , just after the latter reportedly had been suggested as a presidential candidate by his supporters . these observers also caution that since berdimuhammedow and other officials continue to endorse the rukhnama ( a spiritual guide allegedly written by niyazov ) , religious rights may continue to suffer . turkmen media shifted almost seamlessly from exhaustive coverage of niyazov to reporting on berdimuhammedow , perhaps raising the specter of a new "cult of personality," these observers warn . few analysts , however , think that berdimuhammedow or his replacement will be able to or want to re - create the late niyazov's idiosyncratic regime . some observers have criticized the succession process as a "palace coup," since berdimuhammedow and his supporters orchestrated post hoc changes to the constitution to give putative legitimacy to his takeover as acting president and his candidacy in the presidential election . a few observers suggest that berdimuhammedow may be only a figurehead , or is ruling in tandem with the head of niyazov's presidential guard , akmurat rejepov . they argue that constitutional changes and other actions have indicated that the state security council headed by rejepov is now the dominant force , eclipsing the legislature and presidency . the administration appears to have cautiously considered that berdimuhammedow's turkmenistan might prove to be less isolationist and authoritarian , that human rights might improve , and the country might seek to boost trade ties with the outside world , including by building energy export pipelines . assistant secretary of state richard boucher headed the u.s. delegation to the december 24 funeral to signal this u.s. interest in "a new beginning" to u.s. - turkmen relations and to offer u.s. assistance in reforms "if they're ready. he called for "a smooth and peaceful transition of power , but stated that the united states would not "lay down a blueprint" of reforms for turkmenistan to follow. he admitted that he did not have great expectations that the prospective presidential election would be free and fair , but praised berdimuhammedow's proposals to reform education , expand exchange programs , and expand access to the internet as contributing eventually to a more open society . secretary of state condoleezza rice on december 28 voiced similar hopes of revitalized bilateral relations and u.s. interest in "advanc[ing] a stable , democratic , and prosperous future for turkmenistan. boucher stated that the united states "would like to see turkmenistan be able to develop its resources , its oil and gas reserves in a market fashion that gets them a market price for their energy.... that's where the idea of multiple pipelines , multiple outlets , [and] multiple options is really a question of how to secure the sovereignty and independence of the nation.