, excessive rates of interest ) . in contrast , under islamic law , interest is considered to be usurious and is prohibited . some question how lenders profit from financial transactions under islamic law . for instance , in a real estate setting , scf takes the form of leasing , as opposed to loans . instead of loaning money to a prospective purchaser , the bank obtains the property and leases it to the shariah - compliant investor , who pays rent instead of interest . in 1999 , the occ recognized murabaha ( "cost - plus" ) , under which the financial intermediary buys an asset for a customer with the understanding that the customer will buy the asset back for a higher fee . standardization of islamic finance regulations has been of increasing interest in the industry . shariah is open to interpretation and islamic scholars are not in complete agreement regarding what constitutes scf . islamic finance laws and regulatory practices vary across countries . the lack of concurrent viewpoints makes it difficult to standardize islamic financing . standardization also may be challenging because the maturity of islamic finance markets varies from country to country , with some markets well - established and others that are more nascent . without standardization , some industry officials express concern that shariah - compliance risk may grow . the lack of standardization across islamic finance markets raises legal uncertainty that a contract will not be recognized as valid under islamic law by all islamic scholars . this uncertainty has been highlighted by a recent dispute between lebanon's blom bank and kuwait's islamic firm investment dar over whether or not a contract between the two entities was compliant with islamic principles and if payment should be made . many observers view standardization of scf regulations as important in increasing the marketability and acceptance of islamic products . over the years , there have been numerous initiatives to improve regulatory practices . for example , in 2009 , the ifsb published guiding principals on issues such as governance and capital adequacy requirements for various financial products . the aaoifi is in the process of developing new standards in risk management and corporate governance . estimates vary of the size and growth rates of assets held internationally under islamic finance , but suggest that islamic finance is a rapidly growing industry . while it represents a small proportion of the global finance market ( estimated at 1% - 5% of global share ) , the islamic finance industry has experienced double - digit rates of growth annually in recent years ( estimated at 10% - 20% annual growth ) . industry experts estimate that assets held under islamic finance management doubled between 2007 and 2010 to reach around $1 trillion . a survey of the top 500 islamic financial institutions shows that shariah - compliant assets in these institutions rose from $822 billion in 2009 to $895 billion in 2010 . in 2010 , 18 new banks offering scf entered the market and six conventional banks started providing scf via "islamic finance windows. in the united states , there is growing interest for islamic finance and business opportunities for lenders .