by comparison , the potential economic impact of the olympics is small . similarly , while the factories around beijing that were closed down to help reduce air pollution during the olympics will more than likely reopen , the increased awareness of the sources of pollution may keep china from reverting to its pre - olympics status . it would appear that the potential gains that china may hope to acquire from hosting the olympics will be mostly in its public image , prestige , and soft power . the authors report that a study by gu et al . published in chinese in 2003 predicted that the olympics will increase beijing's economic growth by 5% between 2003 and 2009 . a 2005 study by wei and yan ( also in chinese ) concluded that the olympics would increase beijing's economic growth by 0.8% from 2005 to 2008 . all of these studies appear to suffer from one or more of the methodological problems frequently associated with impact analysis of mega - events . in their input - output analysis , zhang and zhao include both sport and non - sport facility investments as part of the olympics - related investments — contrary to the stance of the bocog — coming up with a total investment for the 2008 olympics of 282.53 billion yuan , or $41.3 billion . according to some analysts , the $41.3 billion in "investments" should be properly classified as a cost — not a benefit — of the olympics . the paper also implicitly assumes that all the investment made would not have been made if china was not hosting the olympics . nor do zhang and zhao consider the "opportunity cost" of the olympics - related capital outlay . for example , could the money spent on the new "bird's nest" ( national stadium ) or the "water cube" ( the national aquatic center ) have been instead spent in beijing on housing , medical facilities , or schools ? in addition , the paper does not attempt to estimate the losses of the people displaced from their homes or places of employment so that the new olympic facilities could be built . another significant drawback of the paper is its apparent lack of consideration of china's current economic circumstance , particularly its twin problems of overinvestment and inflation . the chinese press has run several stories pondering the question , "will [china] succumb to the so - called post - olympics effect ( poe ) ? when china originally bid on hosting the 2008 summer olympics , it estimated the cost at $1.625 billion . since then , several revised budgets have been released , raising the official cost to over $2 billion . included in this figure is the expense of building or renovating 76 stadiums and sport facilities in the seven venues — beijing , hong kong , qingdao , qinhuangdao , shanghai , shenyang , and tianjin — at which events will take place . however , these figures only include the direct costs of construction of the olympic sports facilities and related venues . according to one estimate , the actual total construction cost — including the capital spent on non - sport infrastructure — is expected to exceed $40 billion .