that index extends back to 1913 . for earlier years , crs used an extension of the cpi by academic researchers that is maintained at oregon state university . that index also uses the official bls cpi from 1913 forward and periodically updates both earlier and later figures to reflect new , official cpi estimates . inflation adjustments extending over a period of more than 200 years are problematic in many ways . outlays and gdp figures from fy1940 on are from the office of management and budget . for each conflict , crs converted cost estimates in current year prices into constant fy2011 dollars using readily available inflation indices . for years since 1948 , crs used an index of inflation in defense outlays from the dod . for years from 1940-1947 , crs used an index of inflation in defense outlays from the office of management and budget . for years prior to 1940 , crs used an index based on the consumer price index ( cpi ) that the u.s. department of labor , bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) maintains and updates quarterly . the estimates used here are from reliable academic sources , but other experts might use alternative indices of prices or might weight values differently and come up with quite different results . in addition , over long periods , the relative costs of goods within the economy change dramatically . by today's standards , even simple manufactured goods were expensive in the 1770s compared , say , to the price of land . moreover , it is difficult to know what it really means to compare costs of the american revolution to costs of military operations in iraq when , 230 years ago , the most sophisticated weaponry was a 36-gun frigate that is hardly comparable to a modern $3.5 billion destroyer . as a result , yesterday's wars appear inexpensive compared to today's conflicts if only because the complexity , value , and cost of modern technology are so much greater . finally , a very technical and relatively minor point — the inflation indices used here are more specialized for more recent periods . figures since 1940 are adjusted using factors specific to defense expenditures , but no such index is available for earlier years . at least in recent years , cost trends in defense have differed considerably from cost trends in the civilian economy . contemporary inflation indices capture such differences , while older ones do not . inflation is one issue — a dollar in the past would buy more than a dollar today . perhaps a more significant problem is that wars appear more expensive over time as the sophistication and cost of technology advances , both for military and for civilian activities . adjusted for inflation , the war of 1812 cost about $1.6 billion in today's prices , which appears , by contemporary standards , to be a relatively small amount . but using commonly available estimates of gross domestic product , the overall u.s. economy 192 years ago was less than 1 / 1,400 th as large as it is now .