manner. the rowe court first held that maine's recipient - verification provision had a "direct 'connection with' motor carrier services" because "it focuse[d] on trucking and other motor carrier services" and that the maine law had "a 'significant' and adverse 'impact' in respect to the federal act's ability to achieve its pre - emption - related objectives. therefore , the rowe court found that federal law preempted maine's recipient - verification provision . the court reasoned that maine's law had the effect of substituting "government commands for 'competitive market forces' in determining ... the services that motor carriers will provide. the rowe court next held that maine's "deemed to know" provision "applies yet more directly to motor carrier services" because the provision would "impose[] civil liability upon the carrier" if the carrier did not check each tobacco shipment "for certain markings and ... compare it against the maine attorney general's list of proscribed shippers. as a result , the court found that maine's law would affect "congress' major legislative effort to leave ... decisions , where federally unregulated , to the competitive marketplace," because if the court allowed maine's shipment checking system , then other states could impose their own shipment checking systems . this would appear to result in a "significant impact" on congress's deregulatory objectives . thus , the rowe court held that federal law preempts maine's regulation "of the essential details of a motor carrier's system for picking - up , sorting , and carrying goods — essential details of the carriage itself. in making this determination , the court rejected maine's argument that federal law did not "preempt a state's efforts to protect its citizens' public health" and its assertion that its laws should not be preempted because they helped prevent underage smoking . maine based its argument on the legislative history of the faaaa and the synar amendment . the legislative history reference was to a conference report "containing a list of nine states , with laws resembling maine's , that congress thought did not regulate 'intrastate prices , routes and services of motor carriers.' the court held that the faaaa did not include a public health exception for preemption of state laws . first , the court stated that the legislative history did not indicate that congress made a determination on or "focused upon" the delivery regulation issue . second , the court discounted maine's reliance on the synar amendment , which "does not mention specific state enforcement methods. the court further referenced the potentially broad nature of a "public health" exception to federal preemption of state laws related to carriers , noting "the number of products , the variety of potential adverse public health effects , ... and the difficulty of finding a legal criterion for separating permissible public - health - oriented regulations" and found that congress did not likely intend to create a public health exception that could potentially affect tobacco shipments . however , the rowe court stated that general state public health laws would not always be preempted by federal law and that federal law would not preempt state laws with a "tenuous , remote , or peripheral" connection to carrier rates , routes , or services .