ch . 117 ( transportation of illegal sexual purposes including proposed and enlarged 18 u.s.c . 2430 ) or comparable offenses under state law – without any expressed regard for the victim's age , gender , consent , culpability , or participation in commercial sexual activity . section 222 would establish extraterritorial jurisdiction over various peonage and trafficking offenses when the offender or the victim is an american or when the offender is in the united states . section 222 provides a statement of extraterritorial jurisdiction in some instances when it seems likely that federal courts would assume it even in the absence of such an explicit provision . on the other hand , the application of proposed section 1596 might prove more problematic when the only contact with the united states or its nationals or interests is the fact the offender is found or has been brought to the united states . federal prosecution under 18 u.s.c . 1589 ( forced labor ) might be problematic , for example , when the misconduct occurs entirely within another country and neither the offender nor any of the victims of the offense are americans . subsection 223 ( a ) would streamline section 278 of the immigration and nationality act ( 8 u.s.c . 1328 ) with little change in substance . proposed 18 u.s.c . 2429 would condemn knowingly recruiting , enticing , harboring , transporting , providing or obtaining another individual , in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce or within u.s. special maritime and territorial jurisdiction , with the knowledge that the individual would be used to engage in a commercial sex act either as child or through force , fraud or coercion . chs . it would also provide an explicit 10-year statute of limitations within which such suits would have to be filed , proposed 18 u.s.c . 1595 ( c ) . paragraph 214 ( b ) ( 1 ) of section 214 would amend the victims of crime act of 1984 . the crime victims fund finances victim compensation and assistance grants using the fines imposed for violation of federal criminal law , 18 u.s.c . 10601 ( b ) , although congress has capped the amount annually available from the fund . the new section would trump any coverage limitations based on the characteristics of the victim of the crime to be compensated or assisted . subsection 202 ( g ) would require those who recruit foreign workers to disclose various specifics regarding the circumstances and conditions of employment to recruits . paragraph 202 ( g ) ( 3 ) would proscribe knowingly making a material false or misleading statement in such disclosures and would declare that , "the disclosure required by this section is a document concerning the proper administration of a matter within the jurisdiction of a department or agency of the united states for the purposes of section 1519 of title 18 , united states code. section 1519 of title 18 , united states code , proscribes the knowing falsification of records with the intent to impede , obstruct , or influence the proper administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the united states . violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .