successive u.s . administrations have encouraged eu member states to reduce energy dependence on russia through diversification of supply and supported european steps to develop alternative sources and increase energy efficiency . however , europe faces numerous challenges in its attempts to diversify its energy supply . north africa is often viewed as the most likely alternate supplier of natural gas , but political and economic instability in the region have thus far hindered the expansion of its role . increased supply from central asia has been largely dependent on the construction of new pipelines , but , among other complications , russia has worked to prevent the development of alternative pipelines outside its control that would link europe directly to central asian suppliers . many european countries have also emphasized the development of renewable energy , but there are questions about how much of a contribution these sources will ultimately provide . european leaders have sought , with mixed success , to develop a stronger common european energy strategy that coordinates member states' energy policies . the eu has pursued initiatives to liberalize and integrate the internal european energy market , including by expanding the interconnection of grids and pipelines . recent events in ukraine and crimea have created a renewed sense of urgency in relation to such efforts . several european countries have built liquefied natural gas ( lng ) terminals , expanded pipeline interconnectivity with neighbors , and developed the ability to reverse the flow of gas in pipelines in order to mitigate the consequences of a crisis , such as a cut - off of russian gas . in april 2014 , then - prime minister tusk of poland suggested the formation of an eu "energy union" in which a single european agency would purchase natural gas for all 28 members , rather than the current system of bilateral negotiations and contracts . such an energy union would also include "solidarity mechanisms" for member states to aid one another in cases of supply disruption . before recent events in ukraine , the eu had already adopted legislation seeking to introduce more competition and transparency in the energy sector by "unbundling" the ownership of gas production from distribution , and requiring an independent operator of transit and transmission systems . this legislation , combined with a european commission investigation against the business practices of gazprom , has been sharply criticized by russia . in december 2014 , russia announced the cancellation of the south stream project , a pipeline that would have run from russia under the black sea to bulgaria and then onto other european countries , bypassing ukraine . some analysts interpreted the cancellation as a product of russian frustration , both with eu bureaucratic obstacles to the pipeline's construction and european criticism of russia's actions in ukraine . other observers suggest that these reasons provided a cover to abandon a project that had become politically and financially burdensome for russia . although europe is likely to remain russia's main gas buyer for some years , russia is also seeking to diversify its markets by concluding pipeline construction deals with china and turkey .