it is not a requirement under the rule that the measures be available in the designated location . instead , the house rule is meant to provide an additional means through which members , congressional staff , and the general public can access these documents . the house has several means for waiving its rules when it wishes to act expeditiously . for example , the house may set aside any of its availability requirements by unanimous consent . it may also call up and agree to a bill or conference report that has not met the availability requirements by a two - thirds vote to suspend the rules . a rule only waiving the availability requirement can be presented and called up on the same day . conference committee reports and accompanying joint explanatory statements are also considered available if they are in electronic form at such a location . as previously mentioned , according to rule xiii , clause 6 ( a ) ( 1 ) , the one - day layover requirement for a special rule can be waived by two - thirds of the members voting . the house can also waive the availability requirements by a simple majority . if a majority of the house desires to do so , the house can vote on a measure the same calendar day that the text was made available to members . the house usually does this by agreeing to two special rules , as explained below . it may also achieve the same result by convening for two legislative days on the same calendar day in the manner also described below . the rules committee may report a special rule that waives the 72-hour availability requirement for bills , resolutions , or conference reports . special rules , however , often set the terms for considering a measure as well . a special rule for the consideration of a measure might waive the 72-hour availability requirement but also structure the amending process . such a rule would be required to lie over for one legislative day ( unless this requirement was waived by a two - thirds vote ) . similarly , a rule for the consideration of a conference report often waives points of order against the conference report and against its consideration . under current house rules , that special rule is also required to lie over for one legislative day unless the requirement is waived by a two - thirds vote . in short , special rules only waiving the 72-hour availability requirement are not required to lie over for one legislative day . to waive the one - day layover requirement of rule xiii , clause 6 ( a ) , for a special rule , the rules committee may report a special rule that waives this requirement . the rule providing this waiver is subject to the same one - day layover requirement . if such a special rule is adopted , the house can then consider and adopt a special rule providing for the consideration of a measure later on the same legislative day . the special rule for the consideration of the measure can waive the 72-hour availability requirement for the measure .