the missile reload process is slow and difficult for crews . military officials involved with the jltv program appear to be minimizing these findings , reportedly suggesting some of these unspecified problems are "minor improvements identified by soldiers and marines during testing. another report alleges the army "did not respond to questions about the production decision nor the recent dot&e report , which detailed several jltv problems. the army's decision to delay full - rate jltv production affects not just the army , but the other services as well , and can be considered a significant programmatic decision . to reconcile possible concerns , a detailed look at the dod ig's and dot&e's findings and the actions that will be required to rectify identified deficiencies could be in order . such an examination could help policymakers determine if these deficiencies are minor in nature , or if more extensive and potentially time - consuming and expensive corrective actions will be required . while it is not yet known how any delay in full - rate jltv production will affect the program , it might be considered prudent for policymakers to examine the potential consequences of a delayed full - rate production decision . while a minor delay not invoking a nunn - mccurdy breach may be inconsequential or have a minimal impact , a longer delay , potentially triggering a nun - mccurdy breach , could have significant consequences in terms of program schedule ; program cost ; service allocation of jltvs ; overall fielding plan ; training and readiness of units receiving jltvs ; and potential foreign military sales ( fms ) . such an examination could prove useful to policymakers in the event that a full - rate production decision is significantly delayed , particularly in terms of both program oversight and fy2020 defense authorizations and appropriations discussions . the army's march 14 , 2019 , announcement that it was planning to reduce its overall requirement for jltvs by 1,900 vehicles to help free up funding for modernization raises potential issues for congress . with the army reportedly suggesting it has more light tactical vehicle capability than it needs with existing hmmwvs and isvs , questions could arise as to the accuracy of the army's original jltv requirements process . other questions could arise as well: with a revised overall jltv requirement , what is the army's new fielding plan to units ? with fewer jltvs to be fielded , what is the overall operational impact to the force ? with an overall jltv reduction , will the army's reserve components receive fewer jltvs than originally planned ? finally , will this new revised jltv requirement be final , or is it possible the army might again reduce overall jltv requirements to free up funding for other higher - priority programs , or if future budget reductions are imposed on the army ? dod officials have emphasized that jltvs are not intended to replace hmmwvs "one for one. in november 2006 , the joint chiefs of staff's joint requirement oversight council ( jroc ) approved the jltv program .