not all resources are counted for the purposes of determining ssi eligibility . 105 - 285 , nonprofit organizations , and state , local , or tribal governments may compete for grants to fund idas for low - income households . idas funded through this grant process are often referred to as demonstration project idas . first , the total amount permitted to be excluded is reduced by the face value of all life insurance policies held by the individual or his or her spouse . the face value of a policy is the amount the insurer agrees to pay the beneficiary upon the death of the insured . second , the excluded amount of burial expenses is reduced by the total amount of money held in an irrevocable trust ( commonly called an irrevocable burial trust ) available to meet the burial expenses of the individual or his or her spouse . under the provisions of the foster care independence act of 1999 , p.l . 106 - 169 , the corpus , or total value , of any trust established by an individual is counted as a resource when determining ssi eligibility unless there is no circumstance under which a payment from the trust could ever be made for the benefit of the individual or the individual's spouse . nearly all trusts , even irrevocable burial trusts , trusts deemed irrevocable under state law and trusts with specific exculpatory clauses exempting the trust from parts of the social security act , are covered by this provision and the entire value of the corpora of these trusts is counted as a resource . money from a dedicated account can not be used for the daily expenses , food , clothing , or shelter of the child . the representative payee is responsible for keeping records and receipts of all deposits and expenditures and is liable to the ssa for any misuse of money in a dedicated account . while most irrevocable burial trusts are not excluded from the ssi resource rules , the value of the corpora of these trusts is still used to reduce the amount of the burial expense exclusion . a plan for achieving self - support ( pass ) is an individual plan for employment designed by an ssi beneficiary . an ssi beneficiary designs his or her own pass , usually with the assistance of a state vocational rehabilitation agency , disability service organization or ticket to work employment network . the plan must be submitted in writing to the ssa and must be approved by a special network of ssa employees called the pass cadre . the pass must also include a list of any goods , such as assistive devices or job - specific tools , or services , such as schooling , that will be needed by the beneficiary to achieve his or her goal and must include a time line for the use of these goods or services and their cost . resources included in an approved pass are not counted against the ssi resource limits .