sections of p.l . 110-289 concern restrictions on compensation for executives of federal home loan banks , fannie mae , and freddie mac . section 1117 allows the secretary of the treasury , in exercising temporary authority to purchase obligations issued by any federal home loan bank , fannie mae , and freddie mac , to consider limitations on the payment of executive compensation . sections 1113 and 1114 allow the director of the federal housing finance agency to prohibit and withhold executive compensation from executives of federal home loan banks , fannie mae , and freddie mac if wrongdoing has occurred . the appearance is very different . on the other hand , some business groups claimed that the executive compensation disclosure requirements as originally proposed by the sec needed to be revised because they did not provide a completely accurate picture of actual annual executive compensation . on december 16 , 2009 , the sec adopted rule changes titled "proxy disclosure enhancements. the provisions addressing disclosures of executive compensation require a discussion of overall employee compensation policies and practices if risks arise that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect upon the company . congressional proposals concerning executive compensation may be classified into two broad categories: additional disclosure of executive compensation to shareholders and limiting for tax purposes the amounts deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan . an example of additional disclosure is h.r . 4291 , 109 th congress . this bill would have amended section 16 of the securities exchange act of 1934 to require that each reporting issuer must include in the annual report and in any proxy solicitation a comprehensive statement of the issuer's compensation plan for the principal executive officers , including any type of compensation , the short - and long - term performance measures that the issuer uses for determining compensation , and the policy of the issuer concerning other specified measures of compensation . the proxy solicitation materials would have been required to have a separate shareholder vote to approve the compensation plan . the bill would also have required the disclosure of golden parachute compensation in any proxy solicitation material concerning an acquisition , merger , consolidation , or proposed sale . in the 110 th congress , h.r . 1257 , the shareholder vote on executive compensation act , referred to the house committee on financial services , would have amended section 14 of the securities exchange act of 1934 to add a new subsection which would have required a separate , nonbinding shareholder vote in any proxy or consent or authorization for an annual meeting to approve the compensation of executives as disclosed in accordance with the sec's compensation disclosure rules . also in the 110 th congress there was a proposal which would have affected the tax consequences of executive compensation . section 206 of s. 349 would have added an additional requirement to rules governing income inclusion of amounts deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan . also in the 110 th congress , s. 2866 would have amended the internal revenue code to place an annual limitation on aggregate amounts that could be deferred under nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements .