all had pleaded not guilty . prime minister zapatero expressed his view that justice had been served during the trial . however , some analysts and victims' groups expressed frustration that the three alleged masterminds of the operation were either acquitted or handed relatively lenient sentences . spanish police remain concerned about possible "sleeper cells" that may continue to operate in the country . they are particularly concerned about terrorists who leave spain to fight against u.s. forces in iraq and may then return to spain or other countries to launch new attacks . in january 2006 , spanish police arrested a militant and 20 associates involved in recruiting muslims from spain to fight in iraq . in january 2008 , 6 suspects were arrested for allegedly plotting to attack barcelona's public transport system . spanish officials are worried about terrorist recruiting efforts in ceuta and melilla , two spanish enclaves on morocco's coast . more than 300 men have been imprisoned in spain for offenses related to islamist terrorism . france , britain , italy , and spain have reportedly developed a list of about 200 suspected islamist terrorists at liberty on european soil , 20 of whom are living in spain . observers believe prime minister zapatero's philosophy on fighting terrorism may differ somewhat from that of the united states . zapatero has said that he views military force as a "last resort" in the war on terrorism . he has stressed the need to address social and economic roots of terrorism both in spain and in islamic countries . he has called for an "alliance of civilizations" among western countries and islamic ones . zapatero has underlined the need to integrate the muslim population in spain . estimates of the muslim population ( mainly of moroccan or algerian ancestry ) run from 600,000 to 1 million , out of a total spanish population of 44 million . most have been in spain less than 20 years . spain has boosted law enforcement resources devoted to fighting islamist terrorism , a change from the period before march 11 , when the main focus of spanish efforts was on the basque terrorist group eta . ( the 9 / 11 attacks had only a modest impact on spain's counterterrorism priorities ) . improvements include enhancing coordination between spanish law enforcement and intelligence bodies , establishing an integrated database of suspects , and increasing the number of law enforcement officers and arabic language translators . spain has strongly backed anti - terrorist cooperation with its eu partners , although these efforts have reportedly been hampered by some countries' reluctance to share sensitive intelligence . spain has also been eager to highlight its cooperation with the united states in fighting terrorism . in march 2005 , the two countries set up a group of experts and prosecutors to improve legal and police cooperation on terrorism . senior u.s. and spanish officials have also met to try to improve the flow of anti - terrorism intelligence between the two countries . in november 2005 , spanish press sources claimed that cia planes , perhaps carrying terror suspects , made at least 10 secret stopovers at spanish airports in majorca and the canary islands between january 2004 and 2005 .