the practice is now routine . in 2008 , only one regular appropriations bill was considered on the house floor and no comprehensive uc agreement was entered into during its consideration . in 2007 , however , eight regular appropriations bills that came to the house floor under an open rule were subsequently regulated by such a uc agreement . in 2006 , seven of nine regular appropriations bills considered under an open rule were subsequently regulated by such a consent agreement . in 2005 , seven out of ten bills brought up under an open rule were . the time between the adoption of an open special rule for a regular appropriation bill and its being supplanted by a comprehensive uc agreement is often short — in most cases , both occur on the same day . in fact , party leaders often notify members of their intention to craft such a uc agreement even before a bill comes to the house floor . unanimous consent agreements regulating the further consideration of regular appropriation bills limit the universe of possible amendments as well as the time for considering those amendments . in this way , such uc agreements act in a manner similar to a structured special rule , albeit with an important difference: every member can have a say in the content of a uc agreement and , in a real sense , dictate its terms . under an announced policy that is generally strictly adhered to , the speaker will not normally recognize a member to propound such a unanimous consent request unless that request has been cleared in advance by the bipartisan floor and committee leadership . structured special rules , by contrast , are privileged for consideration and adopted at the will of a majority of the house . in short , such uc agreements are largely accepted ( and presumably increasingly common ) because they provide all parties with something they want — party leaders get increased certainty about the floor schedule , the appropriations committee is able to move its bills forward more readily , and members are permitted to offer the amendments of their choice . unanimous consent agreements regulating the further consideration of regular appropriations bills in the house have several common features that differ significantly in effect from consideration under an open rule . such uc agreements routinely: limit the amendments that can be offered to those listed in the unanimous consent agreement by sponsor and subject , or by amendment number . occasionally , a uc agreement will give the majority bill manager blanket authority to offer amendments on the subject of funding levels . by contrast , under an open rule , members may freely offer amendments to each pending paragraph of the bill so long as those amendments comply with house rules and practice . in addition , members are not required to give notice of their amendments under an open rule . specify that each amendment may be offered only by the named member or the member ' s designee and that those amendments shall be considered as read . by contrast , under an open rule , any member might conceivably offer any amendment .