many of the details of how the treaty will operate have yet to be worked out . according to press releases , "under the implementing arrangements that are contemplated by the treaty , our industries will move from the licensing regime under the u.s. international traffic in arms regulations , to the more streamlined procedures that will be set forth in these implementing arrangements. the treaty , which was negotiated under the former liberal [right of center] government that took office in 1996 , would provide australia with streamlined access to u.s. defense trade . australian attitudes towards the united states have changed significantly in recent years . only 48% of australians polled thought that the united states would be a "very close" economic partner of australia in five to ten years as opposed to 53% that thought china would be . this treaty would simplify u.s. export controls on defense articles to australia that reportedly , along with u.s. defense industry , has been frustrated with existing restrictions . several factors have contributed to the decline in u.s. popularity in australia . these include bush administration policies ; the view that the united states is a self proclaimed world watch dog ; the war in iraq ; and u.s. foreign policies . dissatisfaction with the bilateral fta and with the united states' position on global warming also appear to be key factors . in a recent poll sixty seven percent of australians polled had an "unfavorable" opinion of president bush despite former prime minister john howard's close relationship with the president . some 48% of those polled in 2007 felt that it would be better for australia's national interest to "act more independently of the u.s." despite these negative polling results , some 92% of australians believe that the u.s. will be a very close or close security partner over the next decade and some 79% still believe that the u.s. alliance under anzus is "very important" ( 37% ) or "fairly important" ( 42% ) to australia's security . it is striking that despite the decreasing popularity of u.s. foreign policy since 2001 , some 74% of australians polled still trust that the united states would come to australia's assistance were it to be threatened by some other country . the treaty would further draw australia into a very small circle of closely trusted allies that have stood with the united states not only in past conflicts but also in recent conflicts in afghanistan and iraq . it would do this at a time when the united states is increasingly unpopular in the world . many of those concerned with the treaty are concerned not primarily because they believe australia would transfer military technologies to unfriendly states or entities but out of concern that the treaty could undermine existing congressional oversight as defined in itar .