for example in r.a.v . v. city of st. paul , the court struck down a local ordinance as being overbroad and because the regulation was "content - based," proscribing only activities which conveyed messages concerning particular topics . however , in wisconsin v. mitchell , the court found that a wisconsin statute providing sentence enhancement for bias - motivated crimes did not violate a defendant's 1 st amendment right as the statute was directed towards the defendant's conduct and not expression . most recently , in virginia v. black , the court found that the 1 st amendment permits a state to outlaw cross burnings done with the intent to intimidate because "burning a cross is a particularly virulent form of intimidation. however , in a separate ruling , the court found that the virginia statute banning all cross burnings is facially invalid as it impermissibly shifts the burden of proof to the defendant to demonstrate that he or she did not intend the cross burning as intimidation . the 6 th amendment also provides constitutional limits on hate crime statutes . the 6 th amendment provides defendants a right to a jury trial . in apprendi v. new jersey , the court struck down new jersey's hate crime law , which allowed a judge to increase a sentence to double the statutory maximum if he or she found , by a preponderance of the evidence , that the defendant acted with a purpose to intimidate an individual or group of individuals because of race . in reversing the lower court's decision , the court declared that the jury trial and notification clauses of the 6 th amendment and the due process clauses of the 5 th and 14 th amendments embody a principle that insists that , except in the case of recidivists , a judge could not on his own findings sentence a criminal defendant to a term of imprisonment greater than the statutory maximum assigned for which he had been convicted by the jury . in other words , "other than the fact of a prior conviction , any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury , and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. there are three categories of activities subject to congressional regulation under the commerce clause . congress may regulate the use of the channels of interstate commerce , or persons or things in interstate commerce , although the threat may come only from intrastate activities . finally , congress may regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce ( i.e. , those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce ) . the court narrowed the "affects interstate commerce" category with its decision in morrison by rejecting the argument that congress may regulate "non - economic , violent criminal conduct based solely on that conduct's aggregate effect on interstate commerce. in this case , the court considered a suit brought by a former student of the virginia polytechnic institute who alleged that two university football players raped her .