for most other groups and services , nominal amounts are allowed . such charges are prohibited under traditional medicaid for most eligibility groups . nominal amounts set in regulations , ranging from $1 to $19 per month , depending on monthly family income and size , can be collected from ( 1 ) certain families moving from welfare to work who qualify for transitional assistance under medicaid , and ( 2 ) pregnant women and infants with annual family income exceeding 150% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , or , for example , about $19,800 for a family of two . premiums and enrollment fees can exceed these nominal amounts for other specific groups . for example , for certain individuals who qualify for medicaid due to high out - of - pocket medical expenses , states may implement a monthly fee as an alternative to meeting financial eligibility thresholds by deducting medical expenses from income ( i.e. , the "spend down" method ) . cost - sharing is not capped for workers with disabilities and income up to 250% fpl . for non - preferred brand - name drugs and for non - emergency care in an er , a 5% coinsurance charge will be applicable in most cases . for all four kentucky plans , the maximum annual out - of - pocket expense per member is $225 for health care services and $225 for prescriptions . finally , some groups covered by medicaid through certain waivers can be charged premiums that exceed nominal amounts . under dra authority , the general rules regarding applicable premiums are specified for three income ranges . the rules governing consequences for failure to pay premiums differ somewhat under traditional medicaid and dra . under traditional medicaid , for certain groups of pregnant women and infants for whom monthly premiums may be charged , states cannot require prepayment , but may terminate medicaid eligibility when failure to pay such premiums continues for at least 60 days . in contrast , under dra , states may condition medicaid coverage on the payment of premiums , but like traditional medicaid , states may terminate medicaid eligibility only when nonpayment continues for at least 60 days . additionally , under dra , the total aggregate amount of all cost - sharing ( premiums plus service - related charges ) cannot exceed 5% of family income applied on a monthly or quarterly basis as specified by the state . under kentucky's dra spa , this limit is applied on a quarterly basis . states can apply this dra provision to some or all applicable groups . under both traditional medicaid and dra , states may waive premiums in cases of undue hardship . in kentucky , benefits are terminated after two months of non - payment of premiums for children in the separate schip program . upon payment of a missed premium , re - enrollment is allowed . after 12 months of non - payment , payment of the missed premium is not required for re - enrollment . also , working families with transitional medicaid will lose coverage after two months of missed premiums unless good cause is established .