under this scenario , putin might serve as prime minister . according to some indicators , intra - elite conflicts are increasing as pro - putin groups maneuver to protect their interests in the run - up to the supposed putin succession . cec head vladimir churov claimed that the visas had been issued . president putin stated that "we have information that ... this [odihr decision] was made on the recommendation of the u.s. state department," and asserted that "actions such as these cannot wreck the elections," by making them appear illegitimate ( these allegations were denied by the u.s. state department and white house ; see below ) . despite the inability of odihr to organize an electoral mission , over one hundred observers came from the parliamentary assembly of the osce , the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe ( pace ) , and the nordic council . united russia declined to participate in any broadcast political debates , but on october 1 approved a platform that pledged to continue putin's policy course . all the parties were provided with some free television and print access , and on - air candidate debates at times appeared informative . the united russia party and the putin administration - supported nashi youth group stressed russian nationalism and an anti - western image , absorbing and amplifying the themes of the former motherland party ( which was allegedly created and later abolished by the putin administration ) . these themes appeared to at least partly reflect real fears by some part of the putin administration that small domestic groups funded by "enemy" western countries might try to launch democratic "color revolutions," like those that took place in georgia in 2003 and ukraine in 2004 , to re - install the so - called oligarchs and divvy up russia's oil and gas resources . a flyer attributed to nashi called for rallies on december 3-6 to prevent the united states from using "traitors and thieves" such as kasparov to launch a "color revolution. some observers have warned that although united russia might have gained some electoral support by using such themes , associated dangers include fueling ethnic and religious hate crimes and calls for a belligerent and isolationist foreign policy . reflecting these themes , putin explained in a major speech to his supporters on november 21 that he had agreed to head the united russia party list in order to prevent the duma from becoming "a collection of populists paralyzed by corruption and demagoguery," as in the past . he warned his supporters that russia's stability and peace were still threatened by three groups , which he seemed to conflate: the supporters of soviet - era politicians , the supporters of former russian president boris yeltsin , and "those who scavenge outside foreign embassies , foreign diplomatic missions , [and] rely on support from foreign foundations and governments. these groups , he asserted , want "a weak and sick state," and a "disorganized and disoriented society ... in order to wheel and deal behind its back ; in order to receive their piece of pie at our expense.