both individual and group plans are analyzed . the data form virtually a census of such policies among ahip member companies . thus , the ahip data are based on a large number of enrollees in high - deductible health plans . along with the average premiums and deductibles , information on enrollees' age and state of residence is also available . the kaiser family foundation / health research and education trust ( kff / hret ) survey is of firms with at least three employees . although the various enrollment measures are not directly comparable to each other because they represent different concepts , the number of individuals who claim deductions for hsa contributions in 2008 is the smallest number . this is as expected for two reasons: ( 1 ) the number of hsas has been growing over the 2008 to 2010 period , and ( 2 ) not all individuals contribute money to the hsa — and of those who do , not all claim an hsa deduction . ahip provides the most complete information on premiums and deductibles ; the average values are available for the small group and large group markets , and for three age groups in the individual market . no other data source provides breakdowns for more than one of these markets . in all cases , values for individual ( and not family ) insurance plans are reported in table 2 . in general , individuals in small group markets are more costly to insure because the risk of major illness is spread across fewer individuals and because there are fewer economies of scale . small group market deductibles should therefore be higher than large group market deductibles , assuming benefits and other policy characteristics are comparable across group size . the ahip data display the expected pattern for hsa - eligible hdhps , although the difference is not particularly large . the average deductible for small group policies is $2,329 , and the average deducible for a large group policy is $2,203 . hsas have been available since 2004 , and at least five data sources can be used to uncover some basic facts about the recent experience . nevertheless , the data sources differ in the insurance markets analyzed ; whether the information covers hsas , hsa - eligible hdhps , or hsa - eligible hdhps and hras ; and whether the information is provided by employers , insurance companies , or individuals . great caution should be exercised in any attempt to combine data from these different sources . a more fruitful strategy would be to decide on a specific question and use only the source which best answers that question . this primer provides basic guidance in that direction . the primer also provides the most recent data available from each source on enrollment , premiums , and deductible . table 1 identifies the five data sources . the various data sources include two separate surveys of firms , a survey of individuals , data on all policies reported to an association , and a sample of irs tax returns . the data sources are listed in alphabetical order . which data source to use depends primarily on the question being asked .