in utah , water rights may be abandoned or forfeited . senior rights holders may lose their rights if those rights are not used . conditional rights in colorado require rights holders to demonstrate continuous efforts in developing the water right on a regular basis . other water rights also may be lost under certain circumstances according to state law . if senior rights holders lose their rights , the water supply available for junior rights holders to fill their needs would increase . in colorado , a water right may be considered abandoned if it is not used for a 10-year period and there is an intent to abandon . for a water right to be abandoned , there must be intent to abandon by the user and there is no time requirement . for a water right to be forfeited , the water right must not be used for a five - year period . in wyoming , abandonment may take three forms . first , the user may voluntarily abandon the water right . second , one user may allege that another user's right has been abandoned because the other user has not used the right for a five - year period and that reactivation of that right would injure the user's right . third , the state may allege an abandonment if the water is not put to beneficial use for a five - year period and reallocation would serve the public interest . water rights that are lost under these processes revert to the state and may be appropriated in the future . state water laws govern the allocation of water within the state , but water resources rarely are confined to state boundaries . rather , like the colorado river basin , water basins spread across several states . as a result , states often compete for resources from shared basins , and the competition often leads to water disputes between states in regions with shared water resources . interstate water disputes may be resolved in various manners . two of the most common methods are equitable apportionment in the u.s. supreme court and interstate compact negotiated by the parties and approved by congress . the colorado river basin is no exception to the likelihood of disputes and is subject to a number of judicial decisions and interstate compacts , commonly referred to as the "law of the river. junior or senior rights holders may seek to change the geographic or purpose parameters set at the time they acquired their rights . water rights generally are allocated based on a specific point of diversion , location of use , and purpose of use . in order to change the point from which water is diverted from its source or to change the place or purpose of use , a water right holder must apply to the appropriate state office for approval . the state office considering the change may consider factors such as whether the change would exceed historical levels and whether other users' vested water rights would be impaired by the change . junior rights holders may seek to secure water by acquiring the rights of senior rights holders under the water rights transfer process in each state .