however , economists contend that these figures are very misleading . first , nominal exchange rates only reflect the price of currencies in international markets , which can vary greatly over time . the lower estimate of china's economy and living standards may dampen expectations in the west that china might soon move to adopt political reforms . for example , trade and international financial data are generally unaffected by the reduction in china's ppp gdp . it is estimated that in 2007 , china overtook the united states to become the world's second - largest exporter ( after the european union ) . similarly , in 2006 china was the world's fifth - largest recipient of foreign direct investment , the largest steel producer , the second - largest consumer of oil , and by some accounts , the largest emitter of carbon dioxide ( co2 ) . in addition , since 2006 , china has been the world's largest holder of foreign exchange reserves ( $1.5 trillion at the end of 2007 ) . thus , despite the icp results , china remains a major trade and economic power and a major potential global player in international finances and investment flows . for example , the u.s. defense department's annual report on china's military spending includes conversions of china's budget data by the chinese people's liberation army ( pla ) from nominal u.s. dollars into ppp levels . the report estimated the pla's 2003 budget in $30.6 billion in nominal dollars and $141 billion on a ppp basis . the world banks's ppp revision could significantly decrease this estimate and other measurements of chinese military spending as well as various public spending programs . smaller export market potential — as a senior fellow at the council on foreign relations wrote , "u.s. businesses and entrepreneurs hoping to crack the chinese and indian markets must come to terms with a middle class that is significantly smaller than thought . companies with growth plans tied to the indian and chinese markets could face disappointing results. however , it is important to note the limitations of ppp estimates of gdp — and where and when they provide useful insight in economic analysis . although the estimated size of china's economy decreases under the ppp revisions , other aspects on china's economy remain significantly large . the new ppp measurement may increase pressure within china to expand efforts to promote development in the rural areas where over 800 million people reside . according to a recent article in the atlantic monthly , some chinese question why the government does not use its massive foreign exchange reserves to help alleviate poverty and respond to increasing income disparities across the country , rather than invest those funds overseas assets , such as in u.s. treasuries . such a reallocation of china's investment portfolio might have repercussions for the u.s. economy . lower prospects for democracy — prior to the release of the icp revision report , some analysts had speculated that , once china reached a certain level of economic development and possessed a large and educated middle class , it would follow the examples of taiwan and south korea and begin to institute democratic reforms .