equity partnerships . at times , however , the bulk asset sales faced market pricing that was considerably less than the agency desired . to help address such shortcomings , the agency pioneered "equity partnerships" to help liquidate some of the packages of its real estate and financial assets . while the strategy employed a number of different structures , all of the equity partnerships involved a private sector partner acquiring a partial interest in a pool of assets , controlling the management and sale of the assets in the pool , and making distributions to the rtc based on the rtc's retained equity interest . commercial mortgages and securitization . the rtc is widely regarded as a pioneer in the securitization of complex securitized instruments backed by commercial and multi - family loans , commercial mortgage - backed securities ( cmbs ) , which constituted a significant share of the agency's assets . initially , the cmbs were reportedly difficult to sell due in part to the fact that the huge losses that had occurred in the value of commercial mortgages was a major factor in the thrifts' troubles . eventually , however , sales of the cmbs reportedly became quite healthy , and the innovative approach to asset disposal would later earn the rtc praise . the rtc completion act of 1993 ( p.l . 103-204 ) terminated the rtc as of december 31 , 1995 . all of its remaining assets , liabilities , and duties were transferred to the fdic . in the end , the rtc orchestrated the closing of 747 thrifts , more than 25% of the industry . the two remaining members were nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate . in 1991 , motivated by a number of issues , including the rtc's need for interim funding and concerns that its dual board structure was cumbersome and inefficient ( for example , the oversight board had to approve policies recommended by the rtc / fdic board ) , congress passed the rtc refinancing , restructuring , and improvement act of 1991 ( p.l . among other things , the law replaced the oversight board with what has been described as a more limited and less intrusive thrift depositor protection oversight board ( tdpo ) , which included the secretary of the treasury and the chairman of the federal reserve board but not the secretary of housing and urban development . the law also removed the fdic's board from it role as the rtc's board ; and it replaced the fdic as the rtc's manager with the rtc's chief executive officer ( also was also a member of the tdpo ) . the process of closing or resolving individual thrifts involved one of three alternatives: ( 1 ) some thrifts were sold to a healthy acquirer , which involved the rtc paying another institution to buy the insolvent thrift , with most of its assets intact ; ( 2 ) some thrifts were to be shut down with their depositors being paid off and with the rtc retaining all of its assets for later sale ; and ( 3 ) some thrifts were shut down with their deposits being transferred to another institution .