first created in 1970 through p.l . 91-606 , dua benefits are authorized by the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency relief act ( the stafford act ) , which authorizes the president to issue a major disaster declaration after state and local government resources have been overwhelmed by a natural catastrophe or , "regardless of cause , any fire , flood , or explosion in any part of the united states" ( 42 u.s.c . based upon the request of the affected state's governor , the president may declare a major disaster . the declaration identifies the areas in the state eligible for assistance . the declaration of a major disaster provides the full range of disaster assistance available under the stafford act , including , but not limited to , the repair , replacement , or reconstruction of public and nonprofit facilities , cash grants for the personal needs of victims , housing , and unemployment assistance related to job loss from the disaster . the uc program generally does not provide uc benefits to the self - employed , to those who are unable to work , or to those who do not have a recent earnings history . however , when the president declares a major disaster , individuals who would typically be ineligible for uc ( or who have exhausted uc benefits ) may be eligible for dua . in some cases , uc beneficiaries who had an entitlement to uc benefits of fewer than 26 weeks and who had become unemployed as a direct result of a disaster and exhaust their weeks of uc entitlement may be entitled to some dua benefits . no more than a total of 26 weeks of total benefits ( uc plus dua ) are allowable in this situation . dua benefits are funded through the disaster relief fund ( drf ) administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) . the drf is funded annually through discretionary appropriations on a no - yea r basis , meaning that any unobligated funds from a previous fiscal year may be used in future fiscal years . in general , when the balance of the drf has become low , additional funding has previously been provided through annual and / or supplemental appropriations to replenish the account . dol administers the dua program and coordinates with fema to provide the funds to the state uc agencies for payment of dua benefits and payment of state administrative costs under agreements with dol . the individual eligibility requirements for dua differ from the uc program requirements . first , an individual generally must have no entitlement to uc benefits . ( uc beneficiaries who had an entitlement to uc benefits of fewer than 26 weeks and who had become unemployed as a direct result of a disaster and exhaust their weeks of uc entitlement may be entitled to dua benefits . no more than a total of 26 weeks of benefits [uc plus dua] are allowable in this situation. ) for example , eligibility for dua benefits does not necessarily require that the individual have a substantial work history and in some cases does not require that the worker be available for work ( unlike the uc program requirements ) .