when the deficit rises ( i.e. , public saving falls ) , u.s. investment must fall ( referred to as the deficit "crowding out" investment ) or borrowing from abroad must rise . if capital were fully mobile and unlimited , a larger deficit would be fully matched by greater borrowing from abroad , and there would be no crowding out of domestic investment . to be a net borrower from abroad , the united states must run a trade deficit ( it must buy more imports from foreigners than it sells in exports to foreigners ) . since 2000 , u.s. borrowing from abroad and the trade deficit each have exceeded $300 billion each year . borrowing from abroad peaked at $800 billion in 2006 and was $484 billion in 2015 . borrowing from abroad has occurred through foreign purchases of both u.s. government and u.s. private securities and other assets . foreign official holdings are motivated primarily by a desire for a liquid and stable store of value for foreign reserves ; relatively few assets besides u.s. treasury securities fill this role well . depending on the country , foreign reserves may be accumulated as a result of a country's exchange rate policy , the desire to reinvest export proceeds , or the desire to build a "war chest" to fend off speculation against the country's exchange rate and securities . if motivated by any of these factors , rate of return may be a lesser consideration for foreign governments than it is for a private investor . although large , foreign official holdings have not been significantly increasing since 2013 , after more than a decade of rapid growth before then . since 1986 , the united states has had a net foreign debt , and that debt grew to $7 trillion in 2014 . the growth in net foreign debt is unsustainable in the long run , meaning that it cannot continuously grow faster than gdp , as it has generally done in recent decades . this net foreign debt has not imposed any burden on americans thus far , however , because the united states has consistently earned more income on its foreign assets than it has paid on its foreign debt , even though foreigners owned more u.s. assets than americans owned foreign assets . although it is likely that the united states would begin to make net debt payments to foreigners at some point if the net foreign debt were to continue to grow , it has not been a cause for concern yet . to date , the primary drawback is the risk that its unsustainable growth poses , albeit slight in the short run . unsustainable growth in the net foreign debt could lead to foreigners at some point reevaluating and reducing their u.s. asset holdings . if this happened suddenly , it could lead to financial instability and a sharp decline in the value of the dollar . alternatively , were the growth in the debt to decline gradually , it is unlikely to be destabilizing . a related concern is whether the major role of foreigners in treasury markets adds more risk to financial stability .