these provisions had effect for the first time during the 2012 presidential election . the edward "ted" kaufman and michael leavitt presidential transitions improvements act of 2015 ( ptia ) — enacted on march 18 , 2016 — incorporated some provisions of the 2010 law , with modifications , into the pta . it also further amended the pta with provisions for pre - election transition support for presidential candidates . since the pta was passed in 1964 , the funding authorized for its implementation has grown . as originally enacted , the pta authorized funding not to exceed $900,000 for any one transition "for carrying out the purposes" of the act . in 1976 , this provision was amended to authorize "not more than $2,000,000 ... for the purposes of providing services and facilities to the president - elect and vice president - elect" and "not more than $1,000,000 ... for the purposes of providing services and facilities to the former president and former vice president. in 1988 , this provision was amended once again , and the authorized amounts were increased to $3.5 million and $1.5 million , respectively . the 1988 amendments also directed that the "amounts authorized to be appropriated [by these provisions] be increased by an inflation adjusted amount , based on increases in the cost of transition services and expenses which have occurred in the years following the most recent presidential transition. section 4 of the pre - election transition act of 2010 authorized "such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions" of that act . a general provision of the pta authorizes the general services administration ( gsa ) administrator ( administrator ) to spend pta - authorized funds for the provision of most of the specified "services and facilities ... in connection with ... obligations incurred by the president - elect or vice - president - elect" between the day following the general election and 180 days after the inauguration . as discussed in detail below , a number of exceptions to this general provision authorize expenditures for specified pre - election transition - related services and facilities for "eligible candidates. the president - elect , vice president - elect , or eligible candidate ( as defined below ) may designate an assistant to act on his or her behalf in connection with the support provided by the administrator under the pta . up to 10% of the expenditures under the pta may be made upon certification by the president - elect , vice president - elect , or the designated assistant "that such expenditures are classified and are essential to the national security," and that they are consistent with pta provisions . appointees: the pta recommends that the president - elect submit the "names of candidates for high level national security positions through the level of undersecretary of cabinet departments" to the agency with national security clearance functions . it further recommends that this action be taken as soon as possible after the presidential election , and it requires the responsible agency or agencies to carry out background investigations of these candidates for high - level national security positions "as expeditiously as possible ... before the date of the inauguration.