congress has , however , appropriated funding for five specific nsses . on december 19 , 2000 , congress enacted p.l . 106 - 544 , the presidential threat protection act of 2000 , and authorized usss — when directed by the president — to plan , coordinate , and implement security operations at special events of national significance . the special events were entitled national special security events ( nsses ) . pdd 62 also designated specific federal departments and agencies as the lead agencies in the event of terrorist attacks . the u.s. secret service ( usss ) was designated as the lead agency with the leadership role in the planning , implementation , and coordination of operational security for events of national significance — as designated by the president . this $100 million was administered through the department of justice's ( doj ) edward byrne memorial state and local enforcement assistance programs ( the byrne programs ) . doj used the majority of this funding to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities for overtime costs because usss did not have a mechanism to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities for nsse security costs . the most recent nsse funding was $15 million for "emergency planning and security costs" for the district of columbia which was used for the january 20 , 2009 , inauguration of president barack obama . other lead agencies for counter terrorism activities included the federal emergency management agency , the department of defense , and the department of health and human services . some events categorized as nsse include presidential inaugurations , major international summits held in the united states , major sporting events , and presidential nominating conventions . federal funding for national special security events ( nsse ) costs incurred by federal , state , and local entities is one issue congress may wish to address . prior to the establishment of dhs in january 2003 , the president determined what events of national significance were designated as nsses . some might argue that the $1 million congress has annually appropriated for nsses in the past couple of fiscal years may not have be adequate to fund nsse expenditures , such as the recent presidential inauguration . the amount appropriated could be additionally problematic considering that the secret service is not authorized to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities' overtime costs associated with nsses . any security costs incurred by the secret service could be funded with appropriations specifically designated for the agency , whereas federal reimbursement of any security costs incurred by state and local jurisdictions would have to be appropriated through other federal assistance programs — such as the $100 million appropriated for the 2008 presidential nominating conventions through doj's office of justice programs . congress might consider establishing a program within secret service that not only provides the agency with additional funds for unexpected nsse security costs , but also authorizes the secret service to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities for security costs . presently , state and local jurisdictions can use dhs grants , such as the state homeland security grant program ( shsgp ) and the urban area security initiative ( uasi ) for nsse security activities .