art . iii , §1 ; to regulate and make exceptions to the appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court , u.s. const . art . iii , §2 , cl.2 ; to enact all laws necessary and power to carry into effect the constitutional powers of the courts as well as its own , u.s.const . art . i , §8 , cl.18 ; and at least arguably the power to suspend the privilege to the writ in times of rebellion or invasion , u.s. const . art . the question as to the scope of congress' control over court's appellate jurisdiction in habeas cases surfaced when a prisoner challenged the aedpa's habeas limitations in felker v. turpin . in particular , felker argued that the provisions which declared the appellate court determination of whether to authorize a second or successive habeas petition was neither appealable nor subject to a petition for rehearing or for a writ of certiorari . the court took no offense to the limitation of habeas appellate jurisdiction . since the aedpa does not repeal the court's authority to entertain a petition for habeas corpus , there can be no plausible argument that the act has deprived the court of appellate jurisdiction in violation of article iii , §2 . review remained possible under the original writ of habeas corpus . the felker court disavowed any contention that the aedpa's provisions violated the suspension clause . it did not stop with the proposition that the suspension clause does not extend to convicted prisoners or any other prisoners ineligible for the writ under common law , however , but assumed that the suspension clause of the constitution refers to the writ as it exists today , rather than as it existed in 1789 . even under this relaxed standard it found any claim based on felker's case wanting . the aedpa's limitation on repetitious or stale claims was seen as a variation of res judicata , which in the area of habeas had been an evolving body of equitable principles informed and controlled by historical usage , statutory developments , and judicial decisions . the added restrictions which the act places on second habeas petitions are well within the compass of this evolutionary process and do not amount to a suspension of the writ contrary to article i , §9 . shortly after felker , however , the court narrowly construed congressional efforts to restrict review of various immigration decisions and recognized that the courts retained jurisdiction to review habeas petitions , with the observation that otherwise serious suspension clause issues would arise . the court was compelled to face the issue of congress' constitutional authority to absolutely bar access to the writ , which the court avoided in felker , in boumediene v. bush . boumediene was among the foreign nationals detained at the u.s . naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba . the military commissions act stripped federal courts of habeas jurisdiction over the guantanamo detainees . the government argued that noncitizens designated as enemy combatants and detained in territory located outside our nation's borders have no constitutional rights and no privilege to habeas corpus . the detainees disputed both claims .