congress has taken action as well . in may of 2007 , congress enacted a one - year moratorium on the implementation of the rule . that moratorium was extended until april 1 , 2009 , as part of h.r . 2642 , the supplemental appropriations act of 2008 ( the war supplemental ) , signed by the president on june 30 , 2008 . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-5 ) includes a sense of the congress that the secretary of hhs should not promulgate a final rule on cost limits on public providers ( nor on two other rules regarding graduate medical education and rehabilitative services ) . the congressional budget office and the joint committee on taxation estimate that this sense of the congress , in combination with new and extended moratoria on other medicaid rules ( affecting case management services , school - based services , provider taxes , and outpatient hospital services ) , would increase federal spending by $105 million in fy2009 . separate cost estimates for the provisions affecting each individual regulation were not provided . certain igts are specifically allowed for funding the state share of program costs . for example , units of government , such as counties , are able to contribute to the state's share of medicaid . at least three states currently require counties to fund some part of the state share . congress specifically protects the ability of states to use funds derived from state or local taxes and transferred or certified by units of government within a state . some states have instituted programs where all or portions of the medicaid state share is paid by hospitals or nursing homes that are public providers , however , not units of government ; or are units of government , but the state share is returned to the provider sometimes through inflated medicaid payment rates . the purpose of such financing arrangements is generally to draw additional federal funds for which a state share may not otherwise be available . while the funds often help to pay for medicaid or other health care services , those arrangements effectively raise the federal share of medicaid program spending . either way , the net impact is to effectively raise the federal matching rate in the state to levels beyond those specified in law . in may of 2007 , the department of health and human services issued a regulation tightening the administrative procedures and clarifying the vague definitions that allow these types of financing mechanisms to operate . the regulation tightens the definitions of governmental entities and cpes for the purpose of medicaid financing , and establishes a ceiling on payment rates for governmental providers equal to the cost of providing medicaid services . aside from the concerns about the impact of the considerable loss of federal funds on medicaid providers and beneficiaries , the rule has been viewed by some as cms overstepping its authority to limit intergovernmental transfers , when congress explicitly allows such transfers . governors' concerns were expressed in a letter from the national governor's association to house and senate leadership dated february 25 , 2008 .