the government appealed to the supreme court . in making its appeal , the government put forth three arguments challenging the lower court's decision . first , it challenged the preliminary injunction itself , alleging that the court used the wrong test for determining whether a preliminary injunction was proper . second , it argued that enforcement of the controlled substances act precluded any type of waiver for udv . in 1999 , federal agents seized a shipment of hoasca from brazil that was to be used in udv ceremonies . the complaint alleged that the application of the controlled substances act to the church's sacramental use of hoasca violated rfra . at a hearing on the preliminary injunction , the government conceded that the application of the controlled substances act would substantially burden a sincere exercise of religion by the udv , but argued that there was no rfra violation because the application of the controlled substances act was "the least restrictive means of advancing three compelling governmental interests: protecting the health and safety of udv members , preventing the diversion of hoasca from the church to recreational users , and complying with the 1971 united nations convention on psychotropic substances , a treaty signed by the united states and implemented by the [controlled substances] act. the district court found that the government had failed to "demonstrate a compelling interest justifying what it acknowledged was a substantial burden on the udv's sincere religious exercise. the court entered a preliminary injunction prohibiting the government from enforcing the controlled substances act with respect to the udv's importation and use of hoasca . the injunction required the church to import hoasca pursuant to federal permits , to restrict control of the church's supply of hoasca to persons of church authority , and to warn members of the dangers of hoasca . third , it argued that compliance with the united nations convention on psychotropic substances also prevented it from allowing udv to use hoasca , a substance covered under the convention . the court proceeded to affirm the judgment of the united state court of appeals for the tenth circuit and remanded the case for further proceedings . presumably , the remand leaves open the possibility that the government could at some point establish a compelling interest that justifies the burden on the udv . it should also be noted that the court did not address the constitutionality of rfra as it applies to the federal government , as this was not a question presented to it on appeal . the potential impact of the court's decision is uncertain because the court focused on the importance of a case - by - case approach with respect to religious exemptions from generally applicable rules . the court's decision does not establish a broad precedent for religious exemptions from criminal statutes . the government appealed the issuance of the injunction , and a panel of the united states court of appeals for the tenth circuit affirmed , as did a majority of the circuit sitting en banc . it does , however , appear to establish a precedent with respect to the type of evidence that must be presented by the government to establish a compelling interest .