so it is with civil forfeiture . as a threshold matter , however , a claimant must satisfy article iii standing requirements . in order to meet the case - or - controversy requirement of article iii , a plaintiff ( including a civil forfeiture claimant ) must establish the three elements of standing , namely , that the plaintiff suffered an injury in fact , that there is a causal connection between the injury and conduct complained of , and that it is likely the injury will be redressed by a favorable decision . claimants in civil forfeiture actions can satisfy this test by showing that they have a colorable interest in the property , which includes an ownership interest or a possessory interest . article iii's standing requirement is thereby satisfied because the owner or possessor of property that has been seized necessarily suffers an injury that can be redressed at least in part by the return of the seized property . modern forfeiture is a creature of statute . while there are some common themes and general patterns concerning the crimes that trigger forfeiture , the property subject to confiscation , and the procedures associated with forfeiture , federal forfeiture statutes are matters of legislative choice and can vary greatly . virtually every kind of property , real or personal , tangible or intangible , may be subject to confiscation under the appropriate circumstances . the laws that call for the confiscation of contraband per se , property whose very possession has been outlawed , were at one time the most prevalent , and can still be found . its increased use has highlighted its eccentricities and attendant policy concerns . present forfeiture law has its roots in early english law . it is reminiscent of three early english procedures: deodands , forfeiture of estate or common law forfeiture , and statutory or commercial forfeiture . at early common law , the object that caused the death of a human being — the ox that gored , the knife that stabbed , or the cart that crushed — was confiscated as a deodand . coroners' inquests and grand juries , bound with the duty to determine the cause of death , were obligated to identify the offending object and determine its value . the crown distributed the proceeds realized from the confiscation of the animal or deadly object for religious and charitable purposes in the name of the deceased . although deodands were not unknown in the american colonies , they appear to have fallen into disuse or been abolished by the time of the american revolution or shortly thereafter . in spite of their limited use in this country , deodands and the practice of treating the offending animal or object as the defendant have frequently been cited to illustrate the characteristics of modern civil forfeiture . forfeiture of estate or common law forfeiture , unlike deodands , focused solely on a human offender . at common law , anyone , convicted and attained for treason or a felony , forfeited all his lands and personal property . attainder , the judicial declaration of civil death , occurred as a consequence of the pronouncement of final sentence for treason or felony .