the house recedes . the conferees agree that the navy should , in trying to make near - term additions to the high speed vessel fleet , consider fully the possibility of using vessels within the control of the maritime administration . ( page 687 ) . would this impact be in the national security interest ? what is the comparative cost effectiveness of meeting dod sealift requirements under current ship leasing authorities , under a two - year limit for leases of foreign - built ships , and through purchase of u.s. - built ships ? how much risk would there be of a mismatch between dod's sealift requirements and dod sealift capacity if a two - year limit on dod leases of foreign - built ships resulted in a decision by dod to purchase u.s. - built ships rather than lease foreign - built ships ? what are the potential implications , if any , of dod's leases of foreign - built ships for acquisition of other dod capabilities , such as capabilities provided by aircraft ? the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept . 111-230 of july 24 , 2009 ) on h.r . 3326 , states: leasing of foreign built ships the committee remains very concerned with the navy's practice of entering into extended leases for foreign built ships . historically , these leases have met the intent of long term capital lease restrictions on an individual basis , but the recurring nature of several of the leases violates the spirit and intent of the 1990 budget enforcement act . the committee recognizes that the ships leased by the navy fill an important role that must be continued through the near term and well into the future , but believes that ships that fill these roles can provide an economic opportunity for the domestic shipbuilding industry . two years ago , the committee received a report from the navy on their practice of leasing foreign built ships and a plan for ending the practice of leasing foreign built ships by 2012 . the basic conclusion of the report was that the dependence on foreign built ships would be significantly reduced by the year 2012 , principally as a result of shifting requirements and modifications to existing department of defense assets . since the administration is currently undertaking a review of future requirements , the committee is extremely interested in how that review will affect the navy's practice of leasing foreign built ships . therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the navy to update the report submitted in march 2008 regarding the practice of leasing foreign built ships . the report should include the navy's updated plan for terminating the practice of leasing foreign built ships to supplement the fleet and using only domestic built ships by 2012 . additionally , the report should include the necessary budget and funding plans that may be required to accomplish this . this report should be submitted no later than march 31 , 2010 . ( page 166 ) in lieu of a conference report , the house appropriations committee on december 15 , 2009 , released an explanatory statement on a final version of h.r .