although both bills , h.r . 6251 , retained the 10-year primary oil and gas lease term , language removed from an earlier version of h.r . the regulation for offshore extensions does not specify the length of the extension . also , it is not clear how often the bureau of land management ( blm ) or minerals management service ( mms ) grant extensions . on july 17 , 2008 , an energy proposal that reached the house floor ( h.r . 6515 , drill responsibly in leased lands act of 2008 ) , was defeated under a suspension of the rules vote ( which requires a two - thirds majority ) by 244-173 . this act was said to promote an "expeditious and environmentally responsible" development of the national petroleum reserve in alaska ( npra ) and would have denied new leases to lessees that were not diligently developing their leases , producing oil or gas , or relinquishing non - producing leases . proponents of this bill argued that many of the lessees are "sitting" on federal leases , and not producing oil or gas . 6251 would have reduced the primary lease term ( for onshore and deepwater offshore ) from a 10-year term to five years ( with extensions possible ) . on june 26 , 2008 , under suspension of the rules , h.r . 6251 was also defeated by a vote of 223-195 ( two - thirds needed for passage ) . these two bills were referenced as "use it or lose it" proposals , supported by policymakers who argued that it was unnecessary to lift the ocs moratorium because there were millions of acres already leased that could yield crude oil production , but which were presently inactive . it is unclear how much , and how quickly , additional production would take place on non - producing leases . some critics of "use it or lose it" proposals argued that these proposals could create a disincentive for companies to seek leases , and / or result in lower bonus bids on new leases . a "use it or lose it" policy , critics of the bills argued , would not necessarily lead to additional production sooner ; it might , in fact , undercut that objective . as noted , implementation of "use it or lose it" legislation could result in fewer bids or lower bid offers if a more stringent timeline were to be imposed on all leases held . however , by maintaining the 10-year primary term , as both bills would have done , more federal funds might be appropriated for permitting , and other required environmental reviews . a similar bill in the senate ( s. 3239 , responsible federal oil and gas lease act ) would have denied lessees new leases unless lessees were producing oil or gas on currently held leases ; if lessees did not diligently develop each lease , they would have been required to relinquish them . the house and senate proposals would have required the secretary of the interior to define diligent development as it relates to oil and gas leases . u.s. crude oil production peaked at 9.637 million barrels per day in 1970 .