some members of congress disagreed . the 2004 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l . 108-447 , division k , section 146 ) attempted to dispel the confusion by stating that the nvbdc was "a private entity" that "is not an agency , instrumentality , authority , entity , or establishment of the united states government. in some instances , federal courts have been asked to intervene and make a determination of a corporation's status . the management of government corporations has been made difficult by a few factors . first , no single federal department or office is charged with overseeing the activities of all congressionally chartered corporations . ( 3 ) should title 36 corporations only have the same restrictions on their political activities as purely private sector not - for - profit corporations ? congress is free to draft corporate charters to include whatever elements it deems appropriate . having political activities restrictions in congressional charters raises at least three issues: ( 1 ) should any or all title 36 corporations be forbidden from engaging in political activities ? ( 2 ) if some or all of them should be so restricted , which activities ought to be defined as political ? so , for example , the charter of the securities investor protection corporation ( 15 u.s.c . 78 ( ccc ) et seq. ) looks very different from that of the american national red cross ( 36 u.s.c . 3001 et seq. ) the power to craft corporations ad hoc , however , has produced confusion when corporations are established quasi governmental entities ( i.e . entities that have both governmental and private sector attributes ) . this distinction is not without consequence ; governmental entities operate under different legal authorities and restrictions than do private sector corporations . for example , federal agencies typically must follow many or all of the federal government's general management laws . thus , confusion arose over the national veterans' business development corporation ( nvbdc ; 15 u.s.c . 657 ( c ) ) . the department of justice declared it to be a government corporation in march 2004 . second , many of these corporations were established independently of any department and have few , if any , federal appointees on their boards or in their executive ranks . this separation of corporations from departments may make the federal management of corporations more difficult . third , the government corporation control act ( 31 u.s.c . 9101-9110 ) provides many tools for managing chartered corporations' activities . however , congress has excepted many corporations from some or all of the act's provisions . finally , there is the matter of perpetual succession . in centuries past , states and municipalities often limited the duration of a charter ; a corporation would expire unless the sovereign renewed its charter . this practice has fallen by the wayside ; usually , congress charters entities to have "perpetual succession. this means that a corporation may continue to operate , whether it is effective or not , until a law is enacted to abolish it — which seldom occurs .