activities under h.r . 5820 would have been required to ensure that a chemical would meet a stringent standard of safety , namely that the authorized use of the chemical under the conditions imposed "is not reasonably anticipated to present a risk of injury to health or the environment , … provides a reasonable certainty of no harm , including to vulnerable populations," taking into account aggregate and cumulative exposure to the chemical , and "protects the public welfare from adverse effects , including effects on the environment. for uses of bpa when no substitute was available , the bill would have allowed continued bpa use provided that conditions were imposed to reduce risk "to the greatest extent feasible. the house acted on another approach to bpa regulation on july 30 , 2009 , when it amended and approved h.r . 2749 , the food safety enhancement act of 2009 . section 215 of the bill would have required fda to determine whether there was "a reasonable certainty of no harm for infants , young children , pregnant women , and adults , for approved uses of polycarbonate plastic and epoxy resin made with bisphenol a in food and beverage containers ... under the conditions of use prescribed in current [fda] regulations. fda would have been required to notify congress about any uses of bpa for which such a determination could not be made and how the agency would regulate such use to protect the public health . the senate did not act on this bill . senator dianne feinstein sought to amend comprehensive food safety legislation in the senate ( s. 510 ) with an amendment that would have banned the use of bpa in baby bottles and sippy cups , but facing substantial opposition , she abandoned that effort prior to the final vote on the bill on november 30 , 2010 . there is scientific consensus that exposure to high levels of bpa can cause adverse reproductive effects in mammals . there is growing concern among the public , and among many scientists , about low - dose bpa exposures , sharpened by the fact that such exposures within the general population are , without question , highest in infants . the scientific debate about the safety of bpa is likely to continue , and further reaction in the policy , regulatory , and commercial arenas , as well as in congress , is expected . the plan was released in march 2010 . it proposes to include bpa on a list of chemicals of concern , a list created under the authority of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) , section 5 ( b ) ( 4 ) , "on the basis of its potential for long - term adverse effects on growth , reproduction and development in aquatic species at concentrations similar to those found in the environment. a chemical of concern is "a substance that may present an unreasonable risk of injury to the environment. listed chemicals may be subject to additional rulemaking . in addition , epa sent an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to the white house office of management and budget in december 2010 .