, the minimum allocation ) . therefore , after each state's allocation is calculated using the jag formula , if a state's allocation is less than the minimum allocation , the state receives the minimum allocation as its award . if a state's initial allocation was greater than the minimum amount , then the state receives the minimum allocation plus a share of the remaining funds based on the state's proportion of the country's population and the reported number of violent crimes ( population and violent crime data for the states that received the minimum allocation as their award are excluded when allocating the remaining funds for the states that receive more than the minimum allocation ) . after each state's allocation is calculated , 40% of the state's allocation is directly awarded to units of local government . awards to units of local government under jag are made the same way they were under llebg ; namely , each unit of local government's award is based on the jurisdiction's proportion of the average number of violent crimes committed in its respective state . the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-162 ) combined the byrne grant programs and llebg into the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant program ( jag ) . congress consolidated the programs to streamline the process for states applying for funding under the programs . jag funds are allocated to the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , guam , the virgin islands , america samoa , and the northern mariana islands . the formula used by the jag program to allocate funds combines elements of the formulas used in the byrne formula grant program and llebg . under the current jag formula , the total funding allocated to a state is based on the state's population and reported violent crimes . trends in funding for the byrne formula grant , llebg , and jag programs roughly mirror those of other department of justice ( doj ) grant accounts . the amounts appropriated for jag over the fiscal years have been below the amount authorized for the program , which was $1.095 billion per fiscal year for fy2006-fy2012 . specifically , half of a state's allocation is based on a state's respective share of the united states' population . the other half is based on the state's respective share of the average number of reported violent crimes in the united states for the three most recent years for which data are available . under current law , each state and territory is guaranteed to receive no less than 0.25% of the amount appropriated for the jag program in a given fiscal year ( i.e. only units of local government that would receive $10,000 or more are eligible for a direct allocation . the balance of funds not awarded directly to units of local government is administered by the state , which must be distributed to state police departments that provide criminal justice services to units of local government and to units of local government who were not eligible to receive a direct award from bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) .