480 food aid . nicaragua could also receive roughly $6.7 million of the $100 million in mã©rida initiative funds for central america included in the fy2009 budget request . the fy2009 request includes increases in funds for security reform and combating transnational crime , democracy and civil society programs , and trade capacity building programs to help nicaragua benefit from cafta - dr . in addition to traditional development assistance , nicaragua benefits from its participation in the mca , a presidential initiative that increases foreign assistance to countries below a certain income threshold that are pursuing policies to promote democracy , social development , and sustainable economic growth . in 2005 , the bush administration signed a five - year , $175 million compact with nicaragua to promote rural development . the compact , which entered into force in may 2006 , includes three major projects in the northwestern regions of leã³n and chinandega . those projects aim to promote investment by strengthening property rights , boost the competitiveness of farmers and other rural businesses by providing technical and market access assistance , and reduce transportation costs by improving road infrastructure . during a recent visit to nicaragua , john danilovich , director of the millennium challenge corporation , asserted that , despite some political differences , he believes that the united states and nicaragua can work together to combat poverty . u.s. democracy programs aim to reform government institutions to make them more transparent , accountable and professional ; combat corruption ; and promote the rule of law . the united states provided some $13 million to support the november 2006 elections in nicaragua . some 18,000 observers monitored the elections . following the november 2008 municipal elections , usaid is expected to help increase the capacity and transparency of local governments . other ongoing programs seek to increase citizen advocacy and the role of the media . u.s. officials have expressed some concerns regarding respect for human rights in nicaragua . according to the state department's march 2008 human rights report on nicaragua , civilian authorities generally maintained effective control of security forces , but there were some reports of unlawful killings involving the police . some of the most significant human rights abuses included harsh prison conditions , arbitrary arrests and detentions , and widespread corruption in and politicization of government entities , including the judiciary and the supreme electoral council . human rights problems related to labor issues include child labor and violation of worker rights in some free trade zones . in october 2007 , human rights watch asserted that nicaragua's current ban on all abortions , which includes cases where the mother's life is at risk , has put pregnant women's health at risk . nicaragua is a significant sea and land transshipment point for cocaine and heroin being shipped from south america to the united states , according to the state department's february 2008 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) . trafficking occurs on both the country's atlantic and pacific coasts , with increasing trafficking occurring on the pacific coast since 2006 . the incsr report asserts that nicaraguan law enforcement were "very successful" in their counternarcotics efforts in 2007 .