the democratic party appealed . in affirming the lower court ruling , the u.s. court of appeals for the 7 th circuit held that the democratic party had standing to challenge the constitutionality of the voter id law on its face . next , pointing out that no plaintiff was claiming that the law would deter him or her from voting , the court inferred that "the motivation for the suit is simply that the law may require the democratic party to work harder to get every last one of their supporters to the polls. finally , rejecting the argument that the law should be evaluated under the same strict standard applicable to a poll tax , the court held that the burden placed on voters was balanced by the benefit of reducing the risk of voter fraud . the democratic party appealed . voting 6 to 3 , in april 2008 , the supreme court affirmed the decision of the 7 th circuit , persuaded that both lower courts had correctly determined that the evidence in the record was insufficient to support a facial attack on the constitutionality of indiana's voter id law . justice stevens wrote the "lead opinion," which was joined by chief justice roberts and justice kennedy ; justice scalia wrote a concurrence , joined by justices thomas and alito ; justice souter filed a dissent , joined by justice ginsburg ; and justice breyer filed a dissent . the lead opinion in crawford begins with an analysis of the court's 1966 decision in harper v. virginia board of elections , which invalidated a virginia statute conditioning the right to vote on the payment of a $1.50 poll tax . the harper court concluded that whenever a state makes the affluence of a voter or the payment of a fee an electoral standard , it violates the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment . the opinion further notes that under harper , even rational restrictions on the right to vote are invidious if they are unrelated to voter qualifications . clarifying that standard , however , the lead opinion finds that in the court's 1983 decision , anderson v. celebrezze , the court confirmed the general rule that "'evenhanded restrictions that protect the integrity and reliability of the electoral process itself' are not invidious" and indeed , satisfy the harper standard . as the opinion explains , "[r]ather than applying any 'litmus test' that would neatly separate valid from invalid restrictions , we concluded that a court must identify and evaluate the interests put forward by the state as justifications for the burden imposed by its rule , and then make the 'hard judgment' that our adversary system demands. application of this balancing test , the opinion further points out , was made in subsequent election decisions by the court . in making the judgment in crawford as to whether the indiana voter id law is justified by a legitimate state interest , the opinion analyzes each of the three interests identified by the state of indiana — deterring and detecting voter fraud ; preventing voter fraud ; and safeguarding voter confidence — and finds that they are "unquestionably relevant" to the state interest of protecting the integrity of the electoral process .