( this parallels h.r . 4468 from the 114 th congress. ) 1653 , the drinking water affordability act , would ( 1 ) extend dwsrf loan amortization periods to 30 years post project completion for public water systems generally and to 40 years for disadvantaged communities , ( 2 ) increase the portion of dwsrf funds states may use to provide additional subsidization to disadvantaged communities from 30% to 35% , ( 3 ) reauthorize state authority to use dwsrf funds for source water assessment and protection activities , ( 4 ) direct epa to exempt water systems from a federal cross - cutting requirement if the administrator determined that the state had an equivalent requirement , ( 5 ) require epa to review best practices for streamlining the dwsrf loan process and fund administration and to report to congress , and ( 6 ) direct the government accountability office to study and report on the cost - effective and economically feasible rehabilitation or replacement of drinking water infrastructure to meet sdwa goals and an assessment of barriers that preclude use of materials and technologies identified in the study . 1673 , the water affordability , transparency , equity , and reliability act of 2017 , includes provisions to ( 1 ) establish a trust fund with funds going to epa to support cwa and sdwa srfs and activities and to the u.s. department of agriculture for household water well systems ; ( 2 ) direct epa to report on water affordability nationwide , discriminatory practices of water and sewer service providers , and water system regionalization ; ( 3 ) authorize use of dwsrf funds to purchase privately owned community water systems from willing or unwilling sellers ; ( 4 ) require states to use at least 50% of their capitalization grant to provide additional subsidization to disadvantaged communities ; ( 5 ) authorize a grant program for repairing or replacing school drinking water coolers to ensure they are lead free ; ( 6 ) require states to permit recipients of srf assistance to enter into project labor agreements under the national labor relations act ; and ( 7 ) make permanent the "buy american" iron and steel requirement for projects receiving dwsrf assistance . 3009 , sustainable water infrastructure investment act of 2017 , would amend the internal revenue code of 1986 to provide that the volume cap for private activity bonds shall not apply to bonds for drinking water and sewage facilities . s. 181 would require the government accountability office to publish a report identifying all federal public works and infrastructure programs and whether a domestic content preference requirement ( eg , iron , steel , and manufactured products ) applied and to include a list of programs for which a listed preference requirement does not apply . systems owned by federal agencies are not eligible . although the law authorizes assistance to privately owned community water systems , some states have laws or policies that preclude privately owned utilities from receiving dwsrf assistance . the bill would apply american iron and steel requirements to maintenance projects ( in addition to construction , alteration , and repair projects ) .