canadians can also use a government - issued passport . both americans and canadians can present a valid nexus , sentri , or fast card . non - citizens can present a permanent residency card . travelers from bermuda can enter the united states by presenting a passport issued by the government of bermuda or the united kingdom . the total cost of applying for a u.s. passport for those over 16 is $100—a $75 application fee and $25 execution fee . the total cost for children under 16 is $85—a $60 application fee and $25 execution fee . an additional $60 per application is required if expedited service is requested . fees for a passport card are $20 for adults and $10 for children under 16 , with an additional $25 execution fee for each when applying in person . execution fees are not charged for passport or card applications submitted by mail . since january 23 , 2007 , all people , including children , traveling by air between the united states and canada , mexico , bermuda , and the caribbean have been required to present a passport or other valid travel document to enter the united states . a passport is not required for u.s. citizens traveling to or from a u.s. territory , such as the u.s. virgin islands or puerto rico . the 2007 change was poorly communicated to the american public , causing much confusion . many americans did not differentiate air from land and sea travel in the western hemisphere , resulting in many applying for passports who did not need them immediately . furthermore , the change in passport requirements coincided with passport demands for spring break and families' summer travel plans . based on work done for the department of state by bearingpoint , a private contractor that greatly underestimated passport demand , the department was caught off guard in meeting the unprecedented numbers of passport applications throughout 2007 , causing months of delays in many cases . because of the backlog of passports , the department of state hired large numbers of contractors . according to state department officials , 60% of the 4,400 passport employees were from private contractor firms . passport issuance in 2008 and 2009 , reportedly , has been back to the usual four - to - six - week time frame for receiving passports . the department of state fully implemented the final phase of passport requirements for travelers entering the united states by land and sea on june 1 , 2009 . land crossing requirements were originally to take effect by december 31 , 2007 , but were delayed by congress , especially because of concerns of some who represent states bordering with canada and mexico , as well as some with concerns about the effects on the tourism / cruise industry . legislation changed the date for whti implementation at all ports of entry to either june 1 , 2009 , or when the secretary of homeland security and secretary of state have certified compliance with specified requirements ( section b of that act ) , whichever is later . as of june 1 , 2009 , travelers must have passports for all air , land , and sea crossings .