like h.r . 4110 's amendments would have been crafted to provide alternatives to direct involvement of the sentencing court in restitution enforcement . the approach of s. 973 / h.r . 4110 to judicial scheduling of installment payments is much like of h.r . the bureau of prisons has a program designed to ensure that federal inmates meet their financial responsibilities which requires them to have a financial plan to meet those obligations from the money they earn from prison work assignments if nothing else . the justice department's analysis claims that appellate decisions requiring sentencing courts to maintain control over installment payment plans effectively prohibits the bop from enforcing final restitution orders through its long established program . under existing law , a prosecutor's options when enforcing a restitution order include the inmate financial responsibility program , liens against the defendant's property , and garnishment of the defendant's wages or amounts in his pension plan . a court , however , may stay execution of a restitution order pending appeal . 4110 would have dictated that any stay pending appeal that curtails a prosecutor's ability to enforce a restitution order in the interim must be for good cause stated on the record . it also would have seemed to narrow the court's discretion over the protective orders that may accompany a stay . in addition , s. 973 / h.r . 4110 would have stated that the issuance of such mandatory protective measures should not be construed as a limitation on the authority of prosecutors to continue their restitution - related investigations and enforcement efforts . under the federal rules of criminal procedure , the probation officer's sentencing report may not include certain medical , confidential or informant - related material . the rules also forbid disclosing matters occurring before a federal grand jury , subject to certain exceptions , some of which require court approval and some of which do not . various other statutes prohibit the disclosure of financial information but recognize an exception for information provided under grand jury subpoena . those statutes may be thought to proscribe disclosure beyond the grand jury absent some additional grant of authority . there are no statutory provisions which specifically proscribe bureau of prisons officials from disclosing to prosecutors information relating to an inmate's ability to pay restitution . 4110 would have granted the united states attorneys access without court approval to financial information on the defendant held by a grand jury , the probation office , or the bureau of prisons in order to enforce restitution orders . the justice department has explained that the change is necessary because some district courts insist upon court approval before allowing prosecutors to examine probation officer reports on a defendant's financial condition . they do not explain why explicit authority for access to grand jury material and bureau of prison records is necessary or why court approval constitutes an obstacle . 4110 had several provisions designed to prevent the dissipation of assets following the issuance of the original restitution order . for instance , it would have insisted that every restitution order include an instruction that the defendant was to refrain from any action that would conceal or dissipate his assets .