an ambitious doha agreement is the administration's highest priority . with 148 countries involved in the negotiation , this trade negotiation provides the largest potential benefits for u.s. firms , farmers , and consumers . some analysts maintain that large gains or benefits accruing to a broad spectrum of american stakeholders are necessary to help mobilize political support to eliminate or reduce remaining u.s. restrictions on politically sensitive industries and products . this is based on a belief that an ambitious agreement would require large concessions from trading partners that open substantially new market access opportunities for u.s. companies , and that these potential gains would be too tempting for u.s. industry not to support strongly . while labor issues are not part of the doha negotiations , any big commercial agreement would likely trigger globalization anxieties among some segments of the body politic . the broadest and most ambitious initiative being negotiated is the doha round of multilateral negotiations . negotiations are also taking place with panama , thailand , three andean countries ( colombia , peru , and ecuador ) , and the united emirates . assuming that the divisions over labor issues , industry protection , and globalization anxieties that were imbedded in the cafta debate persist , these potential agreements could encounter differential obstacles . whether an ambitious agreement that provides large economic benefits to the u.s. economy might provide some impetus and support for devising a comprehensive adjustment program remains problematic . in the past , implementing legislation for multilateral agreements has included the creation or expansion of adjustment programs . the fta's being negotiated with thailand , panama , and the andean countries might encounter some or all the obstacles raised in the cafta debate . increased foreign competition can lead to plant closings and job losses concentrated in certain regions and industries . given that thailand is a larger trading partner than the five cafta countries combined , globalization anxieties could also play a role in this agreement as well . critics note that it may contribute to increased anxiety and wage pressures , as well as rising income inequality . some of these concerns were central to the divisive debate in congress this year over cafta—an agreement that became a proxy , in part , for more generalized concerns about america's standing in an increasingly globalized world economy . while cafta was approved by narrow margins in both houses , it is not clear how the outcome will affect the administration's future free trade agreement program . the cafta was the most controversial free trade agreement vote taken by congress since the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) implementing legislation was passed in 1993 . the senate passed the cafta implementing legislation on june 30 , 2005 by a vote of 54 to 45 and house passed the legislation on july 28 , 2005 by 217 to 215 . besides being the lowest margin of victory for any modern fta agreement , the votes , particularly in the house , were highly partisan . over 92% of house democrats voted against the agreement , while over 88% of house republicans voted in favor . in both the senate and house debates , many proponents stressed a combination of economic and political arguments .