in my statement today , i will discuss ( 1 ) factors contributing to poor contracting outcomes and accountability , ( 2 ) long - standing issues in the department of defense's ( dod ) management and oversight of contractors supporting deployed forces , and ( 3 ) efforts to improve the capacity of the iraqi government . between fiscal years 2001 to 2008 , congress appropriated nearly $700 billion for the global war on terrorism . since 2003 , we have issued nearly 130 iraq - related reports and testimonies . the scale of contractor support dod relies on today in locations such iraq and elsewhere amounts to billions of dollars worth of goods and services each year , underscoring the need to effectively manage and oversee contractor efforts . the number of attacks on iraqi security forces and civilians also declined from june 2007 levels . further , we found that unclear dod guidance resulted in poor accountability over 190,000 weapons provided to the iraqi security forces . these circumstances influenced dod's decision to pay nearly all of the $221 million in questioned costs . in our july 2007 report , we recommended that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) determine which dod accountability procedures apply or should apply to the program , and ( 2 ) after defining the required accountability procedures , ensure that sufficient staff , functioning distribution networks , standard operating procedures , and proper technology are available to meet the new requirements . several long - standing and systemic problems continue to hinder dod's management and oversight of contractors at deployed locations , including the failure to follow planning guidance , an inadequate number of military and civilian contract oversight personnel , failure to systematically collect and distribute lessons learned , and the lack of comprehensive training for military commanders and contract oversight personnel . however , our prior work has found that dod has made limited progress implementing some key recommendations . our work on contracts to support deployed forces in iraq has identified instances where poor oversight and management of contractors led to negative financial and operational impacts . we have also found that dod has not reviewed contractor support to identify the essential services provided and the department lacked visibility over the totality of contractor support to deployed forces . over the past 4 years , u.s. efforts to help build the capacity of the iraqi national government have been characterized by multiple u.s. agencies leading individual efforts , without overarching direction from a lead entity that integrates their efforts , and shifting time frames and priorities in response to deteriorating security and the reorganization of the u.s. mission in iraq . state commented , however , that the iraqi government , not the u.s. government , is responsible for taking action on gao's recommendations . we believe that the recommendations are still valid given the billions of dollars made available for iraq's energy sector , the limited capacity of the iraqi ministries , and the u.s. government's influence in overseeing iraq's rebuilding efforts . in prior reports , gao recommended that , to improve accountability and minimize opportunities for fraud , waste , and abuse of u.s. funds , ( 1 ) dod adopt sound business processes in its acquisition strategies , such as definitizing contracts in a timely fashion and strengthening accountability procedures ; ( 2 ) dod leadership ensure implementation of and compliance with existing guidance to improve its management and oversight of contractors supporting deployed forces ; and ( 3 ) u.s. agencies work with iraq to develop strategic plans for key sectors . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .