the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) created the independent payment advisory board ( ipab , or the board ) to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare spending. . the board's proposals will be implemented by the secretary of health and human services ( the secretary ) unless congress acts either by formulating its own proposal to achieve the same savings or by discontinuing the automatic implementation process defined in the statute . the report then describes the structure of the board , the calculations and determinations required to be made by the office of the chief actuary ( the chief actuary ) in the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) that trigger a board proposal , and the content of and constraints on board proposals — including the medicare productivity exemptions under section 3401 of ppaca . if the chief actuary determines that projected five - year per capita growth rate in medicare expenditures two years hence exceeds the projected per capita target growth rate , the chief actuary needs to establish an applicable savings target — the amount by which the board must reduce future spending . if the chief actuary makes a determination by april 30 of the dy that the growth rate for an iy is forecast to exceed the target growth rate for that year , the board is to develop a detailed proposal to reduce the growth rate by the applicable savings target . while the board's principal function is to develop proposals that reduce per capita growth in medicare spending , this is not its sole activity . the secretary must implement the board's proposals unless congress affirmatively acts to amend or block them within a stated period of time and under circumstances specified in the act . the secretary is required to automatically implement the proposals contained in the ipab legislation on august 15 of the year such a proposal is submitted , unless prior to that date , legislation is enacted that includes the statement , "this act supersedes the recommendations of the board contained in the proposal submitted , in the year which includes the date of enactment of this act , to congress under section 1899a of the social security act," or in 2017 , a joint resolution discontinuing the automatic ipab implementation process has been enacted . to begin , section 3403 ( d ) of the act establishes special "fast track" parliamentary procedures governing house and senate committee consideration , and senate floor consideration , of legislation implementing the board or secretary's proposal . these procedures differ from the parliamentary mechanisms the chambers usually use to consider most legislation , and are designed to ensure that congress can act promptly on the implementing legislation should it choose to do so . there are two general exceptions to implementing a board proposal: 1 . in addition , beginning in py 2019 , if the board submitted a proposal in the prior year and in the current year the chief actuary determines that the projected per capita rate of growth in national health expenditures for the iy exceeds the projected medicare per capita growth rate for the iy , then the secretary is directed not to implement the recommendations submitted in the prior py . 2 and s. 192 . the commission suggested that "expanding and strengthening the independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) to allow it to make recommendations for cost - sharing and benefit design and to look beyond medicare. . in cbo's march 2011 baseline , by contrast , the rate of growth in medicare spending per beneficiary is projected to remain below the levels at which the ipab will be required to intervene to reduce medicare spending . the president's fy2013 budget , as submitted to congress on february 13 , 2012 , includes a proposal to strengthen the ipab . 452 , the medicare decisions accountability act of 2011 , introduced on january 26 , 2011 , would repeal the independent payment advisory board . 452 was combined with the help efficient , accessible , low - cost , timely healthcare ( health ) act of 2011 ( h.r . on march 22 , 2012 , the house passed the combined version of h.r . 5 .