among the many concerns , particular attention has been paid to the value of coverage in terms of out - of - pocket ( oop ) costs relative to premiums .
considerable congressional attention has been placed on the treatment of consumers within the private health insurance marketplace .
according to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) approximately 18 million americans are subject to annual limits in their health coverage .
private health insurers use annual limits to require the consumer to assume 100% of the cost of coverage after a certain amount of spending for the year has been reached .
111-148 , ppaca ) was enacted on march 23 , 2010 , and amended by the health care and education reconciliation act ( p.l .
one method that lowers the value of coverage is the use of annual limits on the dollar amount of coverage .
ppaca , among other provisions , reorganizes and amends title xxvii of the public health service act ( phsa ) to reform the private health insurance marketplace .
among the immediate reforms are consumer protections from high oop costs by placing restrictions on and eventually prohibiting the use of annual limits .
however , market demand for low - premium coverage has led to the proliferation of limited benefit plans ( "mini - med plans" ) that rely on annual limits to keep premiums down .
111-152 , hcera ) , enacted on march 30 , 2010 ( hereafter collectively referred to as ppaca ) .
the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .
the plan year refers to the 12-month period during which a policy or plan benefit is effective .
the spending can be for the total health benefits covered or targeted to specific services , such as hospitalizations .
the "immediate" reforms in sections 2711 through 2719 of the phsa become effective for plan years beginning on or after september 23 , 2010 .
this report provides an overview of the waiver available for the restriction on annual limits and will be periodically updated to reflect any legislative or regulatory changes .
policyholders and plan members that exceed these coverage caps end up with very high oop costs .
for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , group health plans , grandfathered group health plans , and health insurance issuers offering group or individual plans are restricted , as determined by the secretary of hhs ( hereafter the secretary ) , from establishing annual limits on the dollar value of essential health benefits for any participant or beneficiary .
hhs estimates that about 17.9 million persons have plans or policies that are subject to annual limits , primarily in the individual ( 65% of total ) and small group ( 31% of total ) markets .
these concerns prompted a december 1 , 2010 , hearing by the senate commerce committee .
in the interim final regulations on restricted annual limits , the secretaries of hhs , labor , and the treasury announced that hhs would establish a waiver process for limited benefit plans in order to preserve coverage at similar premiums .
limited benefit plans do not have a categorical exemption from the reforms of ppaca .