considerable congressional attention has been placed on the dollar value of health insurance coverage in terms of out - of - pocket ( oop ) costs placed on policyholders . one method that lowers the dollar value of coverage is the use of annual limits on the dollar amount of coverage . private health insurers use annual limits to require the consumer to assume 100 % of the cost of coverage after a certain amount of spending for the year has been reached . while annual limits may be a benefit design feature in any type of health insurance , they are used as the primary method of cost control for limited benefit plans , which provide low premium coverage typically to low - income part - time or seasonal workers . limited benefit plans generally have annual limits on both the total dollar coverage and on specific coverage categories ( e.g . , hospitalizations and outpatient surgeries ) . without the limited benefit plan option , many of these low - income workers would likely be uninsured . on the other hand , these plans have been criticized as providing little value and giving a false sense of security to policyholders . the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l . 111-148 , ppaca ) prohibits the use of annual limits effective 2014 and places certain restrictions on their use effective for plan years starting on or after september 23 , 2010. these restrictions would effectively eliminate limited benefit plans . accordingly , the secretary of health and human services has implemented a waiver process for limited benefit plans under the authority provided by section 1001 of ppaca to define restricted annual limits in such a way as to `` ensure that access to needed services is made available with a minimal impact on premiums . . considerable attention has been paid to the fairness and transparency of the waiver process . for context , it is relevant to note that congress has not consistently specified the manner in which information concerning health care waivers is to be released to the public . indeed , the annual limits provision of ppaca does not even have a specific public reporting requirement . as a result of different legal standards , or in some cases the absence of a congressional directive , no standardized practice for releasing information about health care waivers has ever been developed . with respect to the annual limits waivers , no obvious bias could be found in the publicly available application materials . moreover , the government accountability office found that the waivers were granted when an application projected a significant increase in premiums or significant reduction in access to health care benefits and not based on organizations factors ( e.g . , being a union ) .