the general services administration ( gsa ) is the federal government's primary civilian real property management agency with 11 regional offices that oversee gsa owned and leased properties across the nation .
congress also enacted the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , which established the general services administration ( gsa ) , and gave the gsa administrator ( administrator ) responsibility for administering federal real property .
at the end of fy2012 , gsa — through its real property office , the public buildings service ( pbs ) — owned or leased 8,708 buildings with more than 422 million square feet of floor space , which represents about 12.6% of the government's 3.354 billion total building square footage .
until congress enacted the public buildings act in 1926 , construction authority for each federal building was approved and funded in separate pieces of legislation .
congress later enacted the public buildings act of 1949 to authorize the planning , site acquisition , and design of federal buildings located outside of washington , dc , and for improvements to existing federal buildings .
the 1959 act re - established earlier requirements to provide for direct federal construction of public buildings through the congressional authorization and appropriation process .
as part of the president's annual budget submission to congress , gsa requests funding for new construction projects , as well as for purchasing , renovating , and leasing existing properties .
gsa is responsible for the design and construction of its buildings and courthouses , and for repairs and alterations to existing facilities , including those that are leased .
when authority for lease - purchase contracts expired in 1957 , congress approved a successor statute , the public buildings act of 1959 .
this act , as amended and re - codified over the years , remains the basic statute authorizing the administrator to construct , own , lease , operate , maintain , and renovate buildings to serve civilian agencies of the federal government .
the 1926 act provided the basic authority for the construction of federal buildings through the congressional authorization and appropriation process .
in 1954 , congress amended the public buildings act of 1949 to authorize the administrator to acquire titles to real property and to construct federal buildings through lease - purchase contracts .
congress authorizes appropriations for these projects , however , through the prospectus approval process , which is discussed below .
gsa's inventory includes offices , courthouses , and land ports of entry .
given the breadth of gsa's holdings , the agency is sometimes referred to as "the government's landlord. .
title to the property was vested in the federal government at the end of the contract period , which could range from 10 to 30 years .
notably , while gsa works with many executive branch agencies and the judiciary to meet their space needs , it generally does not perform real property functions on behalf of the legislative branch .
the bill would make numerous changes to the way that the public buildings service ( pbs ) — the office within gsa responsible for real property management — constructs and leases space , reports on the size and cost of gsa's portfolio , and tracks administrative expenses , such as travel and conference costs .