at the end of fy2012 , gsa — through its real property office , the public buildings service ( pbs ) — owned or leased 8,708 buildings with more than 422 million square feet of floor space , which represents about 12.6% of the government's 3.354 billion total building square footage . congress authorizes appropriations for these projects , however , through the prospectus approval process , which is discussed below . under the public buildings act , as amended ( pba ) , gsa is required to submit a formal document , known as a prospectus , to the senate committee on environment and public works and the house committee on transportation and infrastructure ( referred to throughout this report as the authorizing committees ) as part of the process to authorize and appropriate funds for constructing , purchasing , leasing , or renovating real property . each prospectus must include a brief description of the building to be constructed , altered , or leased ; the building's location ; an estimate of the maximum cost of the project ; a statement by the administrator that suitable space in existing government - owned buildings is not available ; a statement of rents and other housing costs currently being paid by agencies that would occupy the newly constructed , renovated , or leased space ; and an estimate of the future energy performance of the building . each committee must pass a resolution approving the prospectus before the project is authorized to receive appropriations . to that end , gsa is authorized to enter into an emergency lease agreement without an approved prospectus during any period "declared by the president to require emergency leasing authority. . it is not uncommon for the cost of real property projects — particularly the construction of new buildings — to escalate as the project proceeds . gsa is required to resubmit an amended prospectus for congressional approval if the cost of the project exceeds the approved estimated maximum amount by more than 10% . the prospectus approval process provides congress with an opportunity to exercise oversight of gsa's real property activities . in recent years , for example , gsa has submitted prospectuses to consolidate the headquarters of the department of homeland security at the st. elizabeth's campus in washington , dc ; construct a new courthouse in rockford , il ; and expand a land port of entry in san diego , ca . the prospectus process provides an opportunity for congress to assess how well gsa's proposals meet the needs of its clients and to reject those that it finds poorly conceived or unnecessary . congress may also use the prospectus approval process to evaluate cost and space projections . the bill would make numerous changes to the way that the public buildings service ( pbs ) — the office within gsa responsible for real property management — constructs and leases space , reports on the size and cost of gsa's portfolio , and tracks administrative expenses , such as travel and conference costs . there are several committees that are considering real property reform bills which share some of the core objectives of h.r . particular provisions that do not appear in these government - wide real property reform bills but that committees might consider incorporating could include the required offset of new space , zero - based space - justification , and additional cost - escalation warnings . 2612 . a publicly accessible , government - wide real - property database , if established , might be able to incorporate additional information as proposed in h.r . 2612 , such as lease data , as well as data that are not specifically required by h.r .