as health insurance coverage has evolved from an uncommon benefit to a routine one , government's role in subsidizing and regulating that coverage also has changed . while most insured americans obtain health coverage through the private sector , public entities play an increasingly significant role . this ruling helped spur the growth of employer - sponsored health benefits . the federal government enacted the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) to provide certain protections to workers that switched or lost jobs . in response to a persistent rate of uninsurance , the federal government in 2010 passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) , which instituted a large set of reforms to the private insurance market and expanded publicly funded coverage . in 2013 , a majority ( 64.2% ) of americans obtained health insurance through the private sector , which includes both employer - sponsored and nongroup coverage . public programs ( medicare , medicaid / chip , or health care services for military servicemembers and veterans ) provided coverage to 34.3% of americans . approximately 13.4% of americans were uninsured for the entire year of 2013. , within each of the sources , health insurance differs by the market structure itself — group versus nongroup , fully insured versus self - insured ; self - only versus family coverage , etc . health care is also delivered and financed through different arrangements ( e.g. , indemnity insurance , managed care , and consumer - driven health care ) , which are further discussed in the appendix . those arrangements vary due to numerous factors such as how health care is financed , how much access to providers and services is controlled , and how much flexibility the enrollees have to use the services covered under her / his health plan . in this model of health care delivery , the financing of health services and the obtaining of those services are kept separate . this bifurcated arrangement was unquestioned for a time . other distinguishing features of the managed care approach include an emphasis on preventive health care and implementation of quality assurance processes . an hsa , in and of itself , is not a health insurance plan .